Realizing the democratic potential of online sources in the classroom

    
Category:
Long Paper

      
Session:
3

      
Date:
2014-07-09
Time:
13:45:00

      
Room:
413 - Amphimax

    

        
Sweeny
,
									
Robert C.H. 

        

          

        
Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada

      

      

        
Burton
,
									
Valerie C. 

        

          

        
Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada

      

    

  

  
1.1  Overview 

  
How might students understand a digitised edition of a major
documentary series, created at the height of empire and that is perhaps the
largest repository about working people from the mid-19th to the mid-20th
centuries? Would differing forms of digitisation affect their understandings of
the series? Our research results indicate poorly in answer to the first
question and, surprisingly, not at all on the second, because understanding
proved to be less a question of form than content. To realise the potential
created by the radically democratised access that online sources permit, we first
need to understand and respect how 21st century undergraduates see their world.
Rather than focusing on form, we need to explain how their experiences as youth
in a neo-liberal world on the brink of ecological disaster relate to questions
of power, hierarchy and resistance in the past.

  



1.2 Methodology 

  
In the preliminary stage individual qualitative and
intensive examinations of undergraduate students were carried out using two
fundamentally different editions of the same digitalised document. One half
used a traditional textually-introduced document, the other accessed the same
information through individual optional Google pins distributed throughout the
document. This research was then supplemented by in-class experiments and work
with graduate students and colleagues. 

  



2.1 Preliminary questions

  
The dramatic increase in primary source material available
online fundamentally transforms teaching and research in the humanities.
Material that was until recently only available to hundreds or at best
thousands of people at select, often unique, repositories is now virtually
available to potentially millions of people. Historical sources are an
important part of this completely unprecedented and radical reorientation of
archival practice. The sheer scale of this newly democratised access to the
sources of humanity’s story is already extraordinary, and as more and more of
the archival treasures long-housed in former imperial centres becomes available
for research, and importantly for our purposes teaching in classrooms around
the world, the potential for challenging Eurocentric conceptions of our past is
great indeed. 

  
This potential will, however, only be realized if our
students are equipped with the tools they need to critically analyse these
online resources. But is the historical literacy needed to understand a
manuscript the same when encountered as a virtual source? Can a student simply transfer
the knowledge and skills learnt in supervised archival research to working on
the web? Are there different ways of knowing, distinct epistemologies, which
are more appropriate to the qualitatively unique ontology of online sources? If
so, should we be using the conventions of the digital world to navigate through
these virtual sources? (Krug, 2006) How might such techniques affect the
necessary respect of the historical distance between a conscientious researcher
in the present and the source from the past that she or he is examining? 

  
When you hold a centuries old artefact in your hands, feel
its weight, hear the paper crinkle, notice a stain or perhaps just react to the
dust, you sense a connection to the past that is simultaneously humbling and enriching.
This experience has been at the heart of research in the humanities for
centuries. (A. Burton, 2005 & Steedman, 2005) Can a virtual encounter be as
meaningful? (Hayles, 2001 & JDH, 2012) Indeed how useful is to think of
these virtual representations as being from the past? Are they for our students
anything more than a brief illusory encounter with a largely incomprehensible
past? 

  
Discussion of these wide-ranging and difficult questions,
posed as pedagogues of history, led the authors of this paper to engage in an
on-going exploration we call “Explaining ourselves.” An urgency fueled our
discussions, as increasingly we realized that our undergraduate students see
the world in fundamentally different ways than those we taught only a short
time ago. So how might they encounter a major documentary series that was
created at the height of empire, and is perhaps the largest repository with
documentary consistency about working people from the mid-19th to the mid-20th
centuries? Close to hand we had the basis for an answer. 

  



2.2 Finding the answers

  
Memorial University of Newfoundland is a public university
with little in the way of endowments. It is the only university in a province
that has the highest poverty rates in Canada. Until recently, MUN has been a
place where undergraduate teaching was respected. In the early 1970s, young
historians raised the necessary funds from the federal government and convinced
the local university administration to acquire the bulk of a collection
documenting merchant seafarers of the British Empire, held by the Public Record
Office in London. (Matthews, 1974) Covering more than a century, the Crew
Agreements maintained by MUN’s Maritime History Archive document the workforce
of three-quarters of all ocean-going vessels within the British Empire between
1863 and 1939, with declining numbers continuing until the early 1970s. It
provides detailed information about the tens of millions of men and women who
served aboard the largest merchant marine in history. 

  
Completion of the major public history initiative More Than a List of Crew (V. Burton,
2011) provided the impetus for our study. By asking how would students read
digital editions of these complex, multi-layered documents, she reinvigorated
her co-author’s decades-long engagement with the use of computers in the
classroom (Sweeny, 1988-2010). 

  
We developed two digital editions of the same crew
agreement. The first had an extensive, multiple- screen-length, textual
introduction, analogous to an introduction to a historical document in a
scholarly edition in print. The second used Google pins to provide location
specific information to help the user navigate the document. We created two
sets of colour-coded pins. The first reproduced in bite-size portions the
contents of the textual introduction. The second drew attention to any references
to a particular individual onboard. A crew agreement from another vessel a
decade later involving the same seafarer was also made available for the
students to examine. 

  
We worked with fourteen undergraduate Arts and Science
students in individual sessions. We recorded the screen actions for each
session. Working alone, students were given up to two hours to familiarize
themselves with the document. Half worked with the text edition and half worked
with the annotated one. Then the students had two hours to complete two
exercises. The first was content-oriented and used a multiple-choice/short
answer quiz. The second involved the second crew agreement mentioned above,
which was not annotated, but the students could consult the earlier
documentation. They were asked to write a brief analytical essay engaging both
primary documents. These written assignments were followed up by focused
conversations where we asked the students to explain their answers and to
identify the problems they had encountered in working with the documents. As we
progressed this de-briefing became more effective as we realized the merit of
asking students how they would explain these documents to a friend. 

  
In a second phase of the research we broadened our pool. We
asked select graduate students in history and colleagues from our department to
participate. Students in a third year historical methods class as well as
students in a first year introductory course spent a 50 minute class with the
documents after having visited the archives, formally in the first case and
virtually in the second. They were then asked for written feedback. 

  
The results indicated no significant differences in understanding
of the documents, both groups fared poorly. Furthermore, students with substantial
historical training did not show appreciable differences. Thus, our presumption
that form mattered was misdirected. Instead, student comments and their
observed navigation practices both strongly suggest their need to engage
directly with the documents in ways which use their existing understandings if
they are to explore new ways of seeing. 

  



2.3 Where from here?

  
We need to consciously transcend the form/content
divide, if we are
to engender in our students both an appreciation of the internal logic of a
source and the ability to engage concept and evidence. In this particular case, how a crew agreement embodies
the unequal power relationships between seafarers, masters, ship owners and the
state would be the most fruitful pedagogical focus. What are they agreeing to
and why? Crew agreements, like almost all historical documents, record unequal
relations. Young people today live in an increasingly unequal world and this is
the key to a progressive pedagogy that opens up our troubled present to our
many and varied pasts. Used critically, it might yet allow our students to
realize the democratic potential of all those newly accessible documents.

  
References

  
Anderson, Steve F. 
(2011). Technologies of History: Visual Media and the Eccentricity of the Past.
            Hanover, N.H.:  Dartmouth College Press. 

  
Berger, John.
 (2007). Hold
            Everything Dear: Dispatches on survival and resistance. New York: Pantheon
            Books.

  
Booth, A.
 (2006). “Perspectives on the research-teaching relationship
            in history.”

  

    
www.hca.heacademy.ac.uk/assets/hca/documents/case_Studies/snas/booth.doc

  

  
Burton, A. 
(2005). “Introduction: Archive Fever, Archive
            Stories”. In Archive Stories, Facts,
            Fictions and the Writing of History. Durham & London, Duke University
            Press: 1-24. 

  
Burton, V.
 (2011). More
            Than a List of Crew, 
www.mun.ca/mha/mlc

  
Hayles, N. K. 
(2001). “The Transformation of Narrative and
            the Materiality of Hypertext.”Narrative
            9, 21–39. 

  
JDH, the editors
 (2012). “The Difference the Digital Makes.”Journal of Digital Humanities, 2, October.
          

  
Krug, Steve.
 (2006). Don’t
            Make Me Think: A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability. Berkley: New
            Riders Publishin

  
MacDonald, T 
(1996). Ed. The
            Historic Turn in the Human Sciences. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
            Press. 

  
Jimerson, R. C.
 (2006). “Embracing the Power of Archives.”The American Archivist, 69,1: 19-23. 

  
Matthews, K.
 (1974). “Crew Lists, Agreements, and Official
            Logs of the British Empire, 1863-1913.”Business
            History, XVI,1: 78-80. 

  
Schmidt, H. C.
 (2012) “Media, Millennials, and the Academy:
            Understanding the State of Media Literacy within Higher Education.” Journal on Excellence in
            College Teaching 23.4 (2012): 53–75. 

  
Steedman, C.
 (2002) Dust:
            the archive and cultural history. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

  
Sweeny, Robert C.H 
(1988) Les relations ville/champagne, le cas de bois
            de chauffage. Montréal: Éditions du MBHP. 

  
Sweeny, Robert C.H.
 (1997/8). “The Past in the Present: Part I
            Epistemological challenges of computer-assisted teaching, Part II,
            Methodological reflections on computer-assisted teaching.”
www.chashcacommittees-comitesa.ca/cchc-cchi/Doc/CHA98_Sweeny.htm

  
Sweeny, Robert C.H. 
(2010) Montréal, l’avenir du passé: le 19ième siècle. St John’s:
            MMS Atlantic. 

