Rethinking HathiTrust Metadata to Support Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis

    
Category:
Poster

      
Session:
1

      
Date:
2014-07-10
Time:
14:00:00

      
Room:
Amphipôle Common Area

    

        
Fenlon
,
									
Katrina

        

          

        
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

      

      

        
Cole
,
									
Timothy

        

          

        
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

      

      

        
Han
,
									
Myung-Ja 

        

          

        
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

      

      

        
Willis
,
									
Craig

        

          

        
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

      

      

        
Fallaw
,
									
Colleen

        

          

        
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

      

    

  

  

  

  

  
1. Introduction

  
The HathiTrust Digital Library includes over 10
million volumes digitized from more than 90 research libraries. The HathiTrust
Research Center (HTRC) has been established to help scholars get the most from this massive
text corpus by providing cutting-edge tools, services and cyberinfrastructure
that enable advanced computational access to the HathiTrust corpus. An immediate
objective for HTRC is to allow scholars to collect items together for computational
analysis. This has required rethinking the HathiTrust metadata model,
inherited from print-based library cataloging traditions. This poster describes
the motivation for this work, shortcomings of the current metadata model, and
requirements driving the updated model. 

  
2. Motivation

  
Humanities
scholars regularly create collections in the course of their research –
selecting, gathering, and organizing materials from disparate sources to answer
specific research questions 
1
2
. As scholars increasingly rely on digital sources, they need sophisticated tools for the
management and manipulation of “custom collections” of digital texts 
3
 
4
 
5
6
 
7
 
8
9
.

  
The HTRC workset creation tools will allow users to formally gather selected subsets of the HathiTrust corpus together for computational analysis. Early user studies 
10
 suggest several requirements, e.g.: 

  
Worksets must allow scholars
     to gather not just the primary constituents of the HathiTrust corpus (books),
     but also metadata and granular, intra-book content. 

    
Worksets must allow
     integration of external sources, such as linked datasets, secondary
     literature, and references, as shown in Figure 1.

    
Scholars must be able to
     identify and describe worksets so that they may function as sustainable
     and reusable scholarly resources. 

  

    
Fig. 1: Fig. 1: Creating worksets for scholarly analysis

    

  

    
3. Limitations
of MARC-based metadata

  

  
Items in the
HathiTrust corpus today are described exclusively by MARC. While MARC is the
predominant bibliographic metadata standard used in libraries, it is proving inadequate to support the creation of scholarly
worksets from large digital repositories such as the HathiTrust. 

  
To begin with MARC can accommodate
only a fraction of properties of texts and their contexts that are of interest
to scholars. For example, the MARC bibliographic format does not provide fields
for describing an author’s gender, nationality, religion or social
relationships. In addition, library catalogers rarely use the full expressiveness potential of MARC.
The MARC specification defines more than 1,900 fields. However, most bibliographic
records contain only a handful of these 
11
. Table 1 illustrates the use of MARC fields across the 6 million
HathiTrust bibliographic records. Additionally fields used vary by class of text. Table 2 illustrates how infrequently subject headings are used in describing fictional works.

  
 Property

      
 Percent of Records Having

    
 Title

      
> 99% 

    
Publisher

      
 87%

    
Subject -- Topical

      
 72%

    
 LC / Dewey Classification Number

      
 41% / 17%

    
 Subject -- Geographic

      
 37%

    
 Subject -- Temporal 

      
 10%

    
 Fiction Literary Form

      
 5%

    
 Property

      
 Percent of Fiction Records Having

    
 Subject -- Topical

      
 25%

    
 Subject -- Geographic

      
 10%

    
 Subject -- Temporal

      
 5%

    

    
4. Metadata
Design Requirements to Support Workset Creation

  

  
With the generous support of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis (WCSA) project, a collaboration between the HTRC and 4 independent research groups (competitively selected from among 15 respondents to a Request For Proposals issued in November 2013), is exploring answers to the following intertwined questions:

  
Given sparseness of HathiTrust records, can we enrich the corpus metadata by distilling analytics over full
text? Could we deploy/modify off-the-shelf tools, for example, to confirm or
determine language(s) of the text, temporal coverage, spatial coverage, etc.? 

    
Can we augment string-based metadata
with URIs for entities – e.g., names, subjects, place of publication, etc.? If so, HTRC could leverage additional services to meet scholars' needs.

    
Can we formalize the notion of
 worksets in HTRC, e.g., defining the necessary elements of a workset? In doing so, how do we balance rigor with extensibility and
flexibility? What roles do “data”, “metadata”, “annotations”, “tags”, “feature
sets”, and so on, play in the conception, creation, use and reuse of
worksets?

  
In reporting on these questions, we expect to articulate recommendations
to move away from a solely MARC-based metadata architecture towards a more
RDF-centric metadata architecture relying on multiple library-specific and
non-library standards, e.g., MARC, MODS, DC, SKOS, FOAF, schema.org, etc.

  
References

  
1. 
Brogan, M.
 (2006). Contexts and Contributions: Building the Distributed Library. Digital Library Federation/Council on Library and Information Resources. Retrieved August2, 2010 from 
www.diglib.org/pubs/dlf106

  
2. 
Palmer, C. L.
 (2005). Scholarly work and the shaping of digital access. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 56(11), 1140-1153.
          

  
3. 
Dempsey, L.
 (2006). The (digital) library environment: Ten years after. Ariadne, 46. Retrieved February 13, 2013 from 
www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue46/dempsey/

  
4. 
Green, H., Saylor, N.,& Courtney, A.
 (2013). Beyond the scanned image: A needs assessment of faculty users of digital collections. Digital Humanities 2013, Lincoln, Nebraska.
          

  
5. 
Mueller, M.
 (2010). Towards a Digital Carrel: A Report about Corpus Query Tools, retrieved September 17, 2013 from 
panini.northwestern.edu/mmueller/corpusquerytools.pdf

  
6. 
Spiro, L., & Segal, J. 
(2005). The Impact of Digital Resources on Humanities Research, retrieved October 31, 2013 from 
library.rice.edu/services/dmc/about/projects/the-impact-of-digital-resources-on-humanities-research

  
7. 
Warwick, C., Terras, M., Huntington, P., & Pappa, N.
 (2008). If you build it will they come? The Lairah Study: Quantifying the use of online resources in the arts and humanities through statistical analysis of user log data. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(1), 85-102.
          

  
8. 
Sukovic, S.
 (2008). Convergent flows: Humanities scholars and their interactions with electronic texts. Library Quarterly 78(3), 263-284.
          

  
9. 
Sukovic, S.
(2011). E-Texts in Research Projects in the Humanities. In A. Woodsworth & W. D. Penniman (Eds.) Advances in Librarianship (131-202). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing.
          

  
10. 
Green, H., Fenlon, K., Senseney, M., Bhattacharyya, S., Willis, C., Organisciak, P., Downie, J. S., Cole, T., and Plale, E.
 (2014). Using collections and worksets in large-scale corpora: Preliminary findings from the Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis project. Forthcoming paper to be presented at iConference 2014, Berlin, Germany.
          

  
11. 
Moen, William E. & Benardino, P.
 (2003). Assessing Metadata Utilization: An Analysis of MARC Content Designation Use. 2003 Dublin Core Conference: Supporting Communities of Discourse and Practice — Metadata Research and Application, Seattle, Wash. Retrieved October 31, 2013 from 
www.unt.edu/wmoen/publications/MARCPaper_Final2003.pdf

