Light, Liturgy, and Art at the Monastery of Saint John in Müstair, Switzerland: A Software Demonstration

    
Category:
Poster

      
Session:
2

      
Date:
2014-07-10
Time:
16:00:00

      
Room:
Amphipôle Common Area

    

        
Ataoguz
,
									
Kirsten

        

          

        
Indiana University-Purdue University Fort Wayne

      

    

  
In the early Middle Ages, solar observance shaped the art
and architecture of Christian churches in various ways.  Medieval writers from across the
Mediterranean related dramatic lighting effects to alignment with the rising
sun on astronomically and liturgically significant days.  Medieval tradition about the Jewish temple in
Jerusalem provided the model for these lighting effects as well as for the
common use in early medieval churches of windows with jambs and sills that
widen on the inside to expand the projection of natural light.  Archaeoastronomers have hypothesized that
select medieval pictorial programs were coordinated with fenestration to
spotlight specific scenes and figures on specific days and at specific
hours.  We have created a 3D model that
visualizes passage of sunlight on any particular day onto and across the walls
of the monastery of Saint John in Müstair, Switzerland, the earliest standing
church for which such coordination has been proposed.  Our model tests and refines the theory of
Gion Gieri Coray-Lauer, a Swiss archaeoastronomer.

  
The history of the region and other notable features of the
church make Coray-Lauer’s hypothesis highly attractive.  First, early medieval churches in the region
were commonly aligned with still-standing prehistoric markers delineating
astronomical lines or with the rising sun on a patron’s feast day.  Second, the windows of the church have highly
decorated jambs and sills, and they slant at various angles according to the
direction that they face.  Third, the
feast days of the saints highlighted in the three apses of the church cluster
around the summer solstice, when persistent pagan practices denounced by local
preachers culminated each year.  

  
Although situated in a remote alpine valley, the main church
of the Monastery of Saint John preserves the most extensive program of church
decoration in the west to survive from the first millennium.  The program includes the earliest preserved
monumental Last Judgment, east or
west, among many precocious pictorial themes. 
The highly visible wall paintings display great clarity and exemplify
the dictum of Pope Gregory the Great that pictures could serve as books for the
illiterate.  A greater understanding of
the lighting effects deepens our understanding of the multi-sensory experience
of medieval church decoration as well as our understanding of a medieval
monument of great importance both for the extensiveness of its pictorial
program and for the precocity of many images within it.  

  
Scholars have well explored the symbolism of light in
Christianity, both in text and image. 
Writers, both medieval and modern, have also written about the potential
for light to move and dazzle the worshipper. 
Older scholarship on the quality of light in churches was based entirely
on observation, but the methods and calculations of archaeoastronomy, which are
generally incomprehensible to humanities scholars, have yet to penetrate the
mainstream of art historical scholarship. 
The visualization of archaeoastronomical data within 3D virtual models enables
art historians to judge more easily archaeoastronomical theories and to incorporate
them into interpretations of how architects and designers of decorative
programs structured and shaped religious experience.  

  
We propose to demonstrate our software application in an interactive
poster session.  

  
References

  

    
iav.ipfw.edu/iu_home.html

  

