Reading Between the Lines: Image-to-Segment Relationship Development and Analysis

    
Category:
Poster

      
Session:
1

      
Date:
2014-07-10
Time:
14:00:00

      
Room:
Amphipôle Common Area

    

        
Smith
,
									
Dustin

        

          

        
The University of Texas at Austin, United States of America 

      

      

        
Karadkar
,
									
Unmil

        

          

        
The University of Texas at Austin, United States of America 

      

      

        
Galloway
,
									
Pat

        

          

        
The University of Texas at Austin, United States of America 

      

      

        
Davis
,
									
King

        

          

        
The University of Texas at Austin, United States of America 

      

    

  

  

  

  
1. Introduction


  
Crowdsourced transcription has been adopted successfully by institutions large and small in order to
unlock cultural heritage data in handwritten documents. In the case of mental health documents,
however, public transcription is not an option as the act of transcription involves reading them, which
has implications for privacy of patients, doctors, and employees alike, potentially resulting in social
repercussions to family and descendants. We are exploring mechanisms to crowdsource the
transcription of such privacy-sensitive documents while maintaining the anonymity of individuals
named in handwritten records by constraining the context of such mention as well as by exploiting
other characteristics of documents. We report our promising initial results and describe our approach
for generating structural metadata to identify multi-page units within large registers to improve the
granularity of access.


  
1.1. Collection


  
Now called the Central State Hospital (CSH) [1], the first mental health institution for African-Ameri-
cans in the USA was founded in 1870 near Petersburg, VA. The meticulous records maintained by the
custodians of this historically significant institution have are now stored as tiff files at 400 dpi resolu-
tion in a folder structure that reflects minimal structural information. The documents include hospital
administrative and medical records of all stripes. The early records are handwritten and must be tran-
scribed before these can be analyzed to observe patterns in administrative practices, as well as patient
care. While the data set contains several types of handwritten cursive documents, including patient rec-
ords, we are basing the development on board meeting minutes in order to minimize the risks in case of
accidental exposure of these records.

  

    
Fig. 1: Cursive document with line breaks using adaptive thresholds.

    

  
1.2. Prior work


  
There is a vast body of literature on off-line handwriting recognition, focuing on methods for automatic
character identification and transcription into machine-readable text [2]. Two examples of character
recognition work are Tomai et al., [3] who provide a framework for mapping words in a transcript to a
word image in a document and Guillevic et al., [4] who provide a character recognition approach to
unconstrained, small-lexicon cursive handwriting. However, our corpus is heterogeneous, authored by
many individuals, and uses a broad vocabulary.


  
2. Approach


  
We are using the Gamera libraries to segment documents for identifying individual words, in an effort
to minimize the context available to potential transcribers, much like captchas are used to transcribe
old, hard to OCR documents. As each document is different, and the text across lines overlaps in
various ways, ruling out the use of bounding box-based methods. We using flexible, self-adjusting
thresholds to detect lines. Fig. 1 shows the identified line breaks, with some breaks going through
ascenders or descenders within characters in a line based on thresholds detected using document
histograms. Additionally, we are using X-Y histogram profiles to identify and mark meeting minutes
that span multiple pages (but begin on a fresh page) to improve the access granularity for these
documents. Fig. 2 shows the current document structure using solid lines (pages within a register) and
the intermediate minute structure superimposed by dashed lines.

  

    
Fig. 2: Generation of multi-page document structure

    

  
3. Discussion and Future Work


  
References

  
By employing a top-down, histogram-based approach to line and word recognition, our methods are
            adaptable to a large body of handwritten documents that space text at varying distances. In addition, the
            histograms also enable the generation of structural metadata that improves the access granularity.
          

  
The next step is to identify words within each line, where the threshold-based approach will help us
            locate spaces between inclined words. Transcribing at the word-level will enable us to expose varying
            levels of documents contexts to potential transcribers, depending upon a computation assessment of
            privacy sensitivity of content (for example, very short words are less likely to contain individual
            information). Prevention of identity disclosure in these records is critical due to the stigma associated
            with treatment for mental health issues. The methods we develop for transcribing handwritten
            documents will also be applicable to other privacy-sensitive historical records, most immediately, those
            of similar mental health institutions that followed the CSH.
          

  
4. References
          

  
The Central State Hospital
. http://www.csh.dbhds.virginia.gov/
          

  
Cattoni, R., Coianiz, T., Messelodi S., and Modena ,C. M
. (1998). 'Geometric Layout Analysis Techniques for
            Document Image Understanding: a Review' January 1998
          

  
Tomai, C. I., Zhang, B. and Govindaraju V.
 (2002). Transcript Mapping for Historical Handwritten Document Im-
            ages. Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition.
          

  
Guillevic, D. and Suen, C.
 (1995). Cursive Script Recognition applied to the Processing of Bank Cheques. 

