The Development of The Dickens Lexicon Digital and its Practical Use for the Study of Late Modern English

    
Category:
Poster

      
Session:
2

      
Date:
2014-07-10
Time:
16:00:00

      
Room:
Amphipôle Common Area

    

        
Hori
,
									
Masahiro

        

          

        
Kumamoto Gakuen University, Japan

      

      

        
Imahayashi
,
									
Osamu

        

          

        
Hiroshima University, Japan

      

      

        
Tabata
,
									
Tomoji

        

          

        
Osaka University, Japan

      

      

        
Koguchi
,
									
Keisuke

        

          

        
Yasuda Women's University, Japan

      

      

        
Nishio
,
									
Miyuki

        

          

        
Kinki University, Japan

      

      

        
Nagasaki
,
									
Kiyonori

        

          

        
International Institute for Digital Humanities, Japan

      

    

  

  

  

  

  

  
Our project to create The Dickens Lexicon Digital is based on
the index cards which the late Dr. Tadao Yamamoto (1904-91) compiled. Dr. Yamamoto first conceived a plan for the compilation of the Dickens
Lexicon, and published Growth and System of the Language of Dickens: An
Introduction to A Dickens Lexicon in 1950, as an introduction to the Dickens Lexicon. In 1953 he was awarded the Japan Academy Prize for this work.
In order to compile the Dickens Lexicon he collected the materials not
only from all of Dickens’s works but also from his letters and speeches. Unfortunately, in 1991 he died without
seeing his vision accomplished.

  
 The
project for the Dickens Lexicon was organized in 1998 by a research group of 20 (presently
22) scholars. Our ultimate aim has been to compile the Dickens Lexicon
from approximately 60,000 cards, which Dr. Yamamoto elaborately drew up and
left to us, believing that even if the work was not issued in his lifetime, his
pupils and successors would be able to publish it at some future date. 

  
Our Dickens Lexicon is neither book-based nor
document-based, but is rather designed as a web-based reference resource. Users
will be able to search and retrieve lexical data (an idiom, definition, source,
quotation, and notes), stored in the original card-database of approximately
60,000 indexed entries, without the need to install extra software (apart from
a web browser) on their computer. Some of the types of information on
Dickensian idioms should prove quite valuable for non-native researchers of
English in particular, as certain idiomatic expressions in English which are
common to native-speakers of English may be not noticed as idioms, or not
understood as ironical or collapsed idioms. 

  
Fig. 1 shows a result of the retrieval of idioms
beginning with the verb “do” in a test
version of The Dickens Lexicon Digital.
The 199 examples in Fig. 1 are ordered alphabetically but can also be listed in
the chronological or alphabetical order of the titles. Moreover, as Fig. 1
illustrates, if you want to know more information about the idiom “do the
honours of the house,” clicking on the idiom will return a definition drawn from
the Oxford English Dictionary or any
other dictionary, the text and the context where the idiom is used, comments by
Dr. Yamamoto and relevant notes from reference materials referring to the idiom.

  

    
Fig. 1: A test version of The Dickens Lexicon Digital

    

  
The lexicon will also be implemented with a
multifunctional information retrieval system. In addition to the indexed
entries, the lexicon will make it possible to retrieve frequency information on
lexical items (from single words to phrases, including multi-word units)
drawing upon the full corpus of Dickens’ texts, and an additional set of almost
comprehensive 18th- and 19th-centuryfictional texts. A range of functions including
concordance display, sort capability, distribution charts, and statistical data
with t-score and MI-score and log-likelihood ratios will be available in a
user-friendly interface. Therefore, a close scrutiny of idioms appearing in the
Dickens Lexicon, incorporating this multifunctional
information retrieval system, will not only make us more aware of the ways
idioms represent an important facet of Dickens’ usage of English (compared with
those in almost comprehensive 18th- and 19th-century fictional texts), but will
also provide greater insight into the characteristic structure of idiomaticity
in the English language. 

  
The Dickens Lexicon is expected to be released as The Dickens Lexicon Digital, an Internet
website with a multifunctional search engine. It will be able to contribute a
range of research topics including the following:

 



  
(1)A study of the language and style of Charles Dickens.

    
(2)A comparative study of idiomatic expressions between
Dickens and other writers in the 18th and 19th centuries. 

    
(3)A chronological research of idioms.

    
 research into the language and style of 18th- and 19th-century
fictional texts.

    
(5)A research into the history of the English language.


    

(6)An interdisciplinary research between information science
and language study.

 



  
The Dickens Lexicon Digital is scheduled to be available on the web by March 2017,
although it will be partially functional and available on the web in May 2014.

  
References

  
Imahayashi, Osamu, Masahiro
            Hori, Akiyuki Jimura, and Tomoji Tabata
 (2008) "The Dickens Lexicon
              Project."ERA, Vol.25, The
            English Research Association of Hiroshima, 43-53.

  
Yamamoto, Tadao
 (1950 [2003]). Growth and System of the Language of Dickens: An
            Introduction to A Dickens Lexicon. Hiroshima, Japan: Keisuisha.

  
Yamamoto, Tadao 
(1954) "A
            Memoir of the Joint Research for the Compilation of the Dickens Lexicon,"
          Anglica, Vol. 1, No. 5, 438-51.

