GIS in the Digital Humanities: An introductory workshop

    
Category:
Workshops

      
Session:

      
Date:
2014-07-08
Time:
13:00:00

      
Room:
3B - SwissTech

    

        
Gregory
,
									
Ian

        

          

        
Lancaster University, United Kingdom

      

      

        
Barker
,
									
Elton

        

          

        
The Open University, United Kingdom

      

      

        
Lang
,
									
Anouk

        

          

        
University of Stratchclyde

      

    

  

  

  

    
Description:

  

  
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are becoming increasingly
used by historians, archaeologists, literary scholars, classicists and others
with an interest in humanities geographies. To date, however, adoption of the
technology has been hampered by a lack of understanding of what GIS is and what
it has to offer to these disciplines. This introductory workshop, will provide
a basic introduction to GIS both as an approach to academic study and as a
technology. Its key aims are: To establish why the use of GIS is important to
the humanities; to stress the key abilities offered by GIS, particularly the
capacity to integrate, analyse and visualise data from many different types of
sources; to show the pitfalls associated with GIS and thus encourage a more informed
and subtle understanding of the technology; and, to provide a basic overview of
GIS software and data. The workshop builds on a format that has been used
successfully in the past, combining an overview of what GIS and what it has to
offer to the humanities, contrasting case studies of its actual use, and a
roundtable discussion. Please note that it does not provide hands-on software
training, this can be gained from longer courses such as the Lancaster Summer Schools in
Interdisciplinary Digital Methods at Lancaster University (http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/summerschool),
and the Digital Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI) at the University of
Victoria (http://www.dhsi.org) 

  
The workshop will be split into three sessions of approximately one
hour each as show below assuming a 1:00pm start time. As discussed below, these
timings are flexible and could be extended.





  
1:00-1:15:
Welcome and Introductions

    
1:15-2:15:
Session 1: Fundamentals of GIS from a humanities perspective

    
2:15-3:15:
Session 2: Case studies on the use of GIS in the humanities

    
3:15-4:00:
Session 3: Going further with GIS









  
These times could be extended a little if required to allow
us to explore issues in a little more depth.

  

    
Content:

  

  

    
Session 1: Fundamentals of GIS
from a humanities perspective

  

  
This session consists of two talks of around 20 minutes each
leaving an additional 20 minutes for questions. Both presentations will be
given by Gregory. The first of these talks will define what GIS is taking a
technical perspective, introducing the core terminology and the data models
that allow GIS to model the world. It will: define GIS, introduce concepts such
as georeferencing, layers, raster and vector data, spatial and attribute data,
querying GIS data, and the use of maps within GIS. The second talk will take a
top-down approach giving examples of what GIS has to offer to the humanities. It
will argue that the four benefits that GIS gives to the humanities are the
abilities to: structure, integrate, visualise and analyse spatially referenced
data. A wide range of brief examples will be used to describe what this offers
in practice.

  
 

  

    
Session 2: Case studies on the
use of GIS in the humanities

  

  
The second session will draw on two case studies on
different uses of GIS within the humanities. The first will be presented by Dr
Elton Barker a classicist from the Open University. Dr Barker will talk about
his work on Mapping the Ancient World focusing on the work and travels of
Heroditus, a scholar from Ancient Greece. The second will be presented by Dr
Anouk Lang, a literary scholar from the University of Strathclyde. Dr Lang has
used GIS in a range of literary studies focusing on modernist writing outside
Britain and the United States. As well as being from contrasting disciplines
and taking different approaches to using GIS, these two scholars have
approached using GIS in two very different ways: Barker’s work has been
collaborative, while Lang’s has predominantly followed the lone scholar model.
In this way we will demonstrate what can reasonable be achieved by academics
using GIS in the digital humanities. Again, presentations will be around 20
minutes giving plenty of time for discussions about the issues raised.

  
 

  

    
Session 3: Going further with
GIS

  

  
Session 3 is a slightly shorter session. The intention is to
point researchers to where they need to go next if they want to get more
involved in GIS and to allow them to raise the issues and questions that
concern them. It will consist of a short presentation by Gregory that will
briefly introduce issues associated with software and access to data. It will
then broaden out into a round table discussion to allow the participants to ask
the questions that they want to ask. Past experience has shown this to be one
of the most valuable parts of the day. 

  

    
Format:

  

  
The workshop is best done as a half-day. It can be
accommodated in three hours if required, however four would allow a more
in-depth approach. There will be no hands-on software practicals so all that is
required is a room where speakers can present to an audience. We want to
encourage discussion among the participants so a tiered lecture theatre would
not really be suitable. 

  

    
Target audience:

  

  
The
workshop is aimed at a broad audience including post-graduate students, members of academic staff, curriculum and research
managers, and holders of major grants and those intending to apply for them. The workshop is only intended
as an introduction to GIS, so will suit novices or those who want to brush up
previous experience. Based on past experience we would anticipate that the
workshop will be popular and would suggest capping numbers at 30. 

  

    
Communication and publicity:

  

  
No CFP will
be required and the organisers are happy to publicise it beyond the
conventional DH mailing lists. When running similar events in the past we have
asked participants to include a paragraph in their application about why they
want to come to the workshop. This has two advantages: it allows us to tailor
the content more closely to their needs, and if we are over-subscribed, it
allows us to choose which participants will benefit most from the workshop. If
this is possible then we would like to do this again, if not we can use a first
come, first served approach.

  

    
The instructors:

  

  
Prof Ian Gregory
 is Professor of Digital Humanities at Lancaster
University. His research concentrates on the use of GIS in the humanities. He
is currently Principal Investigator on the ERC-funded Spatial
Humanities: Texts, GIS, Places project. He has published widely on the theory
and applied use of GIS in the humanities including Historical GIS: Techniques, methodology and scholarship(CUP, 2007);
Troubled Geographies: A spatial history
of religion and society in Ireland (IUP, 2013) and Towards Spatial Humanities:
Historical GIS and Spatial History (IUP, in press). 

  
Contact: Department of History, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YT, UK. Tel: +44 (0)1524 594967. Email:
I.Gregory@lancaster.ac.uk

  
 

  
Dr Elton Barker
 is a Reader in
Classical Studies at the Open University. His research interests include: the Agon
in ancient Greek literature and thought; Greek epic rivalry and reception;
ancient geographies; and digital Classics. He has been Principal Investigator
of three projects: the HESTIA project, Google
Ancient Places and Pelagios: Enable
Linked Ancient Geodata. He has published widely including Entering the Agon(OUP, 2009)

  
Contact:
Faculty of Arts, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK.
Tel: +44 (0)1908 653247. Email: Elton.Barker@open.ac.uk

  
 

  
Dr
Anouk Lang
 is currently a Lecturer in English at the
University of Strathclyde; from September 2015 she will be a Lecturer in
Digital Humanities at the University of Edinburgh. She uses digital humanities
and geo-spatial technologies to research modernism in the Anglophone world
beyond Britain and the United States, and also to investigate contemporary
reading cultures in digital contexts. She is the editor of From Codex to Hypertext: Reading at the Turn of the Twenty-First
Century (U Massachusetts P, 2012), and is currently Principal Investigator
for an AHRC-funded project on the cultural value of literary participation in
digital 

  
Contact:
School of Humanities, Lord Hope Building, 141 St James Road,
Glasgow G4 0LT, UK. Tel: +44 (0)141 548 3518. Email: Anouk.Lang@strath.ac.uk

