Leveraging Web Archiving Tools for Digital Humanities Research and Digital Exhibition

    
Category:
Workshops

      
Session:

      
Date:
2014-07-07
Time:
09:00:00

      
Room:
3A - SwissTech

    

        
Reed
,
									
Scott Brian

        

          

        
Internet Archive, United States of America

      

    

  
Summary:


  
Web archiving is an important part of the digital preservation field. While most are
familiar with the Wayback Machine available at archive.org, less are aware that
there are a number of tools and services developed for organizations and
individuals to create their own web archives, including the capability to search and
analyze large data sets built around the WARC file format, an ISO standard for web
archiving. In addition, web archives provide permanent URLs for citation and can
show how a website has changed over time at a single URL, even if no longer
available on the live web. In short, web archives can save a researcher’s life and
provide very necessary preservation tools for archivists to manage content that is
only posted on the web.


  
This workshop will introduce participants (15-20) to basic web archiving concepts
and challenges. Using the Archive-It (www.archive-it.org) web application,
participants will have a hands-on opportunity to build a collection of content
archived from the web, which can include their own organization’s web presence,
social media, digital exhibitions, data sets, or topical content publicly available on
the web. Following the workshop participants will have a searchable archive
available to them, including the option of downloading WARC files for long term
preservation or research.


  
The target audience for this workshop includes interested humanities scholars
researching the web and professionals responsible for digital library service or digital archives. No prerequisite knowledge of or experience with web archives is
necessary, and the session does not require any programming or advanced technical
knowledge of the web. The workshop will not be oriented towards those with deep
knowledge of web archives or the WARC format, although there could be time
allotted to a demonstration of another web archiving tool or project related to
digital humanities and web archiving and this should be specified in the CFP (see
below). 

  
CFP:


  
In order to make the most of the 3 hour workshop and ensure that the curriculum is
tailored toward participant interest, a CFP will be requested for all interested
persons. It should include:


  
Description of participant research interest or professional projects.

    
Description of prior experience with using web archives or their own web
archiving (if applicable).

    
5 to 10 websites to be archived as part of 1 or more collections of content, and links
to the Robots.txt files if applicable. More information is here:
https://webarchive.jira.com/wiki/display/ARIH/Robots+Exclusion+Protocol#RobotsExclusionProtocol-Whatistherobotsexclusionprotocol?


  
With permission from participants, URLs will be crawled as a test (no data archived)
prior to the workshop so post crawl reports can be analyzed as part of the workshop
curriculum.


  
The CFP process is not intended for competitive review but to ensure relevancy and
preparedness of participants. It should be received at least 2 weeks before the
workshop. CFPs will be reviewed by the instructor and Kristine Hannah, Director of
Web Archiving Services at the Internet Archive.


  
Cost and Equipment Required:


  
There will be no additional costs associated with the workshop. It will require a
meeting room with wireless internet and a projector with screen. Participants will
bring their own wi-fi enabled laptop computers and there should be sufficient
power outlets.


  
Agenda Outline:

  

    
15 minutes

  

  
Welcome and participant introductions including overview of content being
archived


  

    
25 minutes

  

  
Overview of web archiving, including:

  
history of web archiving

    
common software tools (Heritrix, Wayback)

    
overview of WARC file format

    
overview of Internet Archive and Archive-It

  

    
60 minutes

  

  
Hands-on Archive-It web application training

  
creating a collection

    
adding and scheduling seeds to be crawled

    
starting and monitoring (crawls)

    
modifying the scope of the crawl

    
understanding Robots.txt

    
analyzing post crawl reports

    
quality assurance, including addressing web archiving limitations and challenges


  

    
30 minutes

  

  
Other Web Archiving tools (including WAIL)


  

    
30 minutes

  

  
Understanding the web archiving life cycle, including:

  
open source tools for researching WARC files

    
future steps for web archiving

    
sharing and reporting on future research projects utilizing web archives (group
activity/share)


  

    
20 minutes

  

  
Flex time, conversation, and breaks


  
About the instructor:


  
Scott Reed has worked as a Partner Specialist with the Internet Archive since 2012,
primarily supporting organizations and researchers using Archive-It to build
collections of web content. In addition he is a volunteer with the GLBT Historical
Society in San Francisco, CA . Prior to his work with Internet Archive, he has
worked in various positions as a digital literacy and media instructor and project
assistant for non-profit organizations and academic departments in California
including the Feminist Studies department of the University of California, Santa
Cruz. 

