This paper discusses the research project Translantis, which uses innovative technologies for
cultural text mining to analyze large repositories of digitized public media, such as
newspapers and journals.1 The Translantis research team uses and develops the text mining
tool Texcavator, which is based on the scalable open source text analysis service xTAS
(developed by the Intelligent Systems Lab Amsterdam). The text analysis service xTAS has
been used successfully in computational humanities projects such as Political Mashup,
WAHSP, BILAND, and DutchSemCor. Within the context of the Translantis project, xTAS,
coupled to Elasticsearch, will be further developed. Future versions will include clustering
concepts and sentiment mining of issues in public debates. Translantis researchers are using
Texcavator to detect and track cultural references in large textual corpora.
In order to test the potential of cultural text mining, Texcavator will be used to analyze the
role of reference cultures in debates about social issues and collective identities. The central
use case of this project is the emergence of the United States in public discourse in the
Netherlands from the end of the nineteenth century to the end of the Cold War. This
concept of reference culture is be used to discuss long-term asymmetrical processes of
cultural exchange involving dimensions of power and hegemony. The concept recognizes
the fact that some cultures assume a dominant role in the international circulation of
knowledge and practices, offering or imposing a model that others imitate, adapt, or resist.
Reference cultures are mental constructs that do not necessarily represent a geopolitical
reality with an internal hierarchy and recognizable borders. These culturally conditioned
images of trans-national models are typically established and negotiated in public discourses
over a long period of time. However, the specific historical dynamics of reference cultures
have never been systematically analyzed and hence are not fully understood. To explore these dynamics, this project asks three interrelated questions. We propose that the key to understanding the emergence and dominance of reference
cultures is to chart the public discourse in which these collective frames of reference are
established. Text mining methodologies allow us to trace changes in “big data” repositories
of public media, such as newspapers, journals, and other periodicals. Central to this project
is the large digital data collection of the National Library of the Netherlands (KB), which
contains 9 million newspaper pages and over 1.5 million journal pages2. This large collection
of serialized historical texts, which have been OCR-ed and provided with meta-tags, allows
us for the first time to study long-term developments and transformations in national
discourses in a systematic, longitudinal, and quantifiable way, by using innovative text-mining tools.
The semantic text mining tool Texcavator has direct access to historical textual repositories
and is able to handle queries on-the-fly, and to produce visualization such as timelines and
word clouds based on integrated topic modeling and NER modules. This allow us to test the
value of qualitative heuristic models and to pair them in a meaningful fashion with
quantitative methodology. Some of the methodological challenges involve the calibration
between close and distant reading, the normalization of search results from unevenly
distributed historical media, and adjusting for lexicological changes that affect the accuracy
of sentiment mining and concept mining.
					First results indicate the ability to mine “hidden debates” in public media in a bottom-up
(inductive) manner, based on the footprints that used terms leave behind. More
importantly, the tool is innovative in that it pinpoints continuities and discontinuities in public discourse, for instance by showing variations in the context in which key terms are
used, and changes in sentiment values of words over time. We argue that this marks a
promising transition from text mining to “concept mining” and new forms of cultural text
mining that go beyond already established mining features. We will demonstrate that semantic mining of big data open new vistas in historical research
because they (a) provide a robust framework for producing new vistas on macro history;
and (b) can be complemented with numerical data sets provided by other researchers, for
example on economic and social trends. This, ultimately, is the transformative promise of
digital humanities as a multi-dimensional window on political, economic, and social change. 
            1. Translantis: Digital Humanities Approaches to Reference Cultures; The Emergence of the United States in Public Discourse in the Netherlands, 1890-1990 (funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research), wwww.translantis.nl.
          
            2. kranten.delpher.nl/Aiden, Erez, and Jean-Baptiste Michel (2013). Uncharted: Big Data as Lens on Human Culture. New
            Yrok: Penguin.Balog, K., M. Bron and M. de Rijke (2011). ‘Query Modeling for Entity Search Based on Terms,
            Categories and Examples,’ ACM Transactions on Information Systems 29, no. 4,
            Article 22, November 2011.Dougherty, M., E.T.Meyer, C. Madsen, C. van den Heuvel, A. Thomas, and S. Wyatt (2010), Researcher
            Engagement with Web Archives: State of the Art. London: JISC.Eijnatten, Joris van, Toine Pieters, and Jaap Verheul (2013). “Big Data for Global History: The
            Transformative Promise of Digital Humanities.” Low Countries Historical Review/BMGN
            128-4: 55-77.Hernandez, J.F., A.K. Mantel-Teeuwisse, G.J.M.W. van Thiel, S.V. Belitser, J.A.M. Raaijmakers
            and T. Pieters (2011). Publication trends in newspapers and scientific journals for SSRIs and
              suicidality: a systematic longitudinal study. BMJ OPEN 6, no. 1.
          Huurnink, B., L. Hollink, W. van den Heuvel and M. de Rijke. ‘Search Behavior of Media
            Professionals at an Audiovisual Archive: A Transaction Log Analysis.’ Journal of the
            American Society for Information Science and Technology 61, no. 6 (June 2010):
            1180-1197.Huijnen P., F. Laan, M. de Rijke, and T. Pieters. A digital humanities approach in the history
            of science; eugenics revisited in hidden debates by means of semantic text mining.
            Histoinformatics, Springer (forthcoming, 2013).Jijkoun, V., M. de Rijke and W. Weerkamp. ‘Generating Focused Topic-specific Sentiment
            Lexicons,’ 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
            2010), July 2010.
          Meij, E., M. Bron, L. Hollink, B. Huurnink and M. de Rijke. “Mapping queries to the Linking
            Open Data cloud: A case study using DBpedia.” Journal of Web Semantics 9, no. 4
            (November 2011): 418-433.
          Pieters, T., and S. Snelders.“Standardizing psychotropic drugs and drug practices in the
            twentieth century: Paradox of order and disorder.” (2011) Studies in the History and
            Philosophy of the Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42: 412-415.Snelders, S., and T. Pieters. (2011) “Speed in the Third Reich: Metamphetamine (Pervitin) Uses and
            a Drug History From Below.” Social History of Medicine. First published online:
            February 19.Thomas, A., E.T., Meyer, M. Dougherty, C. van den Heuvel, C. Madsen, and S. Wyatt (2010). Researcher Engagement with Web Archives: Challenges and Opportunities for
            Investment. London: JISCVerheul, Jaap (2010). “Through Foreign Eyes.” In Discovering the Dutch: On Culture and Society of
            the Netherlands, edited by Emmeline Besamusca and Jaap Verheul, 267-77.
            Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.