Since place names form
the underlying semantic content of almost all geographic documents, the ability
to identify them in texts and images is essential in any attempt to work with,
compare or interpret them. For early maps and geographic texts this ability is
especially important, because while they rarely conform to standard geometries
or schemas, they often provide the earliest attestations to towns, peoples, and
other spatially localized phenomena. Tools, infrastructure and resources for
collating, aligning, and exploiting toponyms in early maps and geographic
documents would therefore have a broad and significant impact across a range of
fields, including Archaeology, History, Classics, Genealogy and Modern Languages.In this paper we
showcase early work on the detection of possible toponyms in digitized texts
and scanned old maps. It builds upon the successful Pelagios initiative which
has been connecting a variety of heterogeneous online resources related to classical
antiquity. In contrast, Pelagios 3 will extend its scope to the European,
Islamic and Chinese Middle Ages, but focus predominantly on geographic works.
These in turn will form a core body of material around which we hope to see a
more diverse body of references accumulate in time.Since our ultimate aim
is to enable humanities scholars to annotate and discover places in documents
for themselves, we discuss our use and adaption of existing open source tools
within a framework that puts a premium on flexible, lightweight and easy to use
resources. Moreover, that discussion will be based on two real-case scenarios,
in order to demonstrate the strengths of our approach and flag up potential
issues that require further attention. Our first test case tackles the issue of extracting place names from
a text. The Vicarello Goblets are a collection of four silver drinking vessels dated
to around late third or early fourth century AD, engraved a land itinerary
between Gades (modern Cadíz, Spain) and Rome. Each goblet indicates the
road stations along the route (varying between 104 and 110 on each goblet), as
well as the distances in miles between them. These unusual ‘texts’, the
limited range of places that they represent, the easy identification of the
majority of locations, along with the fact that there
are images and transcriptions available online already, makes the Vicarello Goblets
an optimal source for trialling the methodology that we will use on much larger
corpora of texts, including travel guides, gazetteers, encyclopaedias and more.
To obtain annotations from the Vicarello Goblets, all the toponyms
are matched against places in a URI-based gazetteer, that is, a directory of
places which assigns a persistent Web address to each entity, allowing for
disambiguation at a global level. The engravings on the Vicarello Goblets
already represent ordered lists of toponyms. Therefore we can directly match
the lists against the gazetteer based on name similarity, and then disambiguate
by taking into account geographic proximity between different places in the
list. For further documents which are of a less structured nature (i.e. which
contain more free-form narrative text) we are experimenting with a combination
of ‘geoparsing’ technologies, including the Edinburgh Geoparser and the
Stanford NLP Toolkit. Identification is only half the story, however. The data model that
we have developed for Pelagios 3 allows for rich item metadata that cleanly
differentiates between information about the item and information about the
places that relate to it (and how). For instance, toponyms in a document may
follow a certain sequence or layout. A simple mashup not only shows the
toponyms from the four Vicarello Goblets on a map, but how they relate to one
another as an itinerary. An information box at the bottom provides the
information about the document itself (Fig. 1), while a small layer menu lets
the user switch layers on and off for each individual goblet to allow immediate
comparisons. Selecting a place displays a popup with a textual transcription
from the Goblets, and metadata drawn from the gazetteer. What is noteworthy
about this mashup, however, is not so much the map itself – for which comparable
projects already exist – but rather that the map can be automatically
generated from a simple Pelagios data file, containing item metadata and
annotations in Open Annotation RDF format. Thus the pathway from data
production to visualization is both efficient and highly scalable across large
numbers of documents.Previous work on toponym
recognition in scanned maps focuses on contemporary documents for the simple reason
that old maps remain extremely difficult for machines to parse. Our proposal is to automate the
identification of potential toponyms in terms of their location, extent and orientation on the map image, so that
researchers can then associate the results with items in pre-existing gazetteer
lists and ultimately with URI-based gazetteers. The example given here is of
Ptolemy’s regional map of Ireland and Great Britain (Fig. 1), digitized by the
British Library.Our first processing phase generates
a black-and-white mask image, which isolates and separates “background” from
“foreground”. The next phase locates and characterises features – in our case, connected objects – on the foreground image
using an algorithm that detects contours. Since toponyms often consist of
multiple features, the final phase aims to connect the detected features to
groups that most likely represent a single toponym. Fig. 2 shows that for our
test case the algorithm detected toponyms with a high success rate, correctly
locating 38 of 41 places.Our initial work with additional
(including visually more complex) maps has raised several error scenarios
and prompted some initial responses:While we expect that the amount of
manual tuning and intervention will be further reduced by refining the
processing workflow, toponym identification on old maps will never be a fully
automated process. Therefore, we are also developing user interfaces and
graphical tools that help both professional and public users carry out the
manual work of aligning imagery to the gazetteers. On the one hand, we are
experimenting with ways of re-presenting the user with re-oriented and visually
enhanced image fragments so that they can be more easily interpreted. On the
other we can use the spatial information in such images, and data from previous
annotations, to propose likely candidates for ‘one-click’ annotations, and
auto-completion of transcriptions.The data produced will provide us
with opportunities to visualise both maps and texts in new ways. For instance,
corpora of structurally similar documents, such as portolan charts, can be
directly compared in terms of the places they refer to, the toponyms used, and
their sequence along a coastline, in a similar manner to the itineraries
described above. Alternatively, we can also blend out and replace toponyms with
either modern or ancient alternatives where known, helping make these important
documents easier to interpret for both scholars and public alike (Fig. 3). Most
importantly we see this as the firsts steps in drawing new connections between
the extraordinarily diverse range of early geospatial documents that have come
down to us.Fig. 1: Mashup showing route of the Vicarello Goblets
(http://pelagios.github.io/demos/vicarello-alpha/)
Fig. 2: Part of Ptolemy’s regional map of Ireland and Great Britain. (Ca. 1480 © The British
Library Board. Harley MS 7182 ff.. 60v-61.) Toponyms identified automatically and
annotated with oriented bounding boxes.
Fig. 3: Original map (left) and map with original toponyms dynamically blended out and replaced with corresponding modern place names.Rainer Simon, Elton Barker, Leif Isaksen. (2012). Exploring Pelagios: A
            Visual Browser for Geo-Tagged Datasets. In International
            Workshop on Supporting Users' Exploration of Digital Libraries. Eneko Agirre, Kate Fernie, Arantxa
            Otegi, Mark Stevenson (Eds.) Cyprus, Paphos, September 27, 2012, pp. 29 - 34.Schmidt, M. G. (2011), A
            Gadibus Romam: Myth and Reality of an Ancient Route. Bulletin of the Institute of Classical
            Studies, 54: 71–86.Elliott, T. & Gillies, S.
            (2011). Pleiades: An UnGIS for Ancient Geography. Poster presented at Digital
            Humanities 2011, Stanford University. Available at: http://dh2011abstracts.stanford.edu/xtf/view?docId=tei/ab-192.xmlGrover, C, Tobin, R, Byrne, K,
            Woollard, M, Reid, J, Dunn, S & Ball, J (2010), 'Use of the Edinburgh
              geoparser for georeferencing digitized historical collections' In Philosophical
            Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical & Engineering
            Sciences, vol 368, no. 1925, pp. 3875-3889.http://nlp.stanford.edu/downloads/lex-parser.shtmlSee, for example, http://vici.org/ http://www.openannotation.org/http://www.bl.uk/onlinegallery/onlineex/unvbrit/p/001hrl000007182u00060vrb.htmlRainer
            Simon, Peter Pilgerstorfer, Leif Isaksen, Elton Barker. (2013). Towards Semi-Automatic
              Annotation of Toponyms on Old Maps. In 8th International Workshop on Digital
            Approaches in Cartographic Heritage. Rome, Italy, September 19-20, 2013.