Perspective
in novels has been an important subject of research in literary studies.
Ishimaru (1985) defined perspectives as the viewpoint of narrators; she roughly
classified perspectives in novels as the first-person perspective, where the
central character narrates the story from his/her perspective, and the
third-person perspective, where the omniscient narrator recounts the story from
a neutral perspective. This is a basic classification of perspective in
literature. These perspectives represent the spirit of the age, typically shown
in the positivism in 19th century French novels (Ishimaru, 1985), and also
affect a readers’ impression of the characters and involvement in the work, and
thus perspective is an important subject in literary studies. Computational stylistics has been one of
the important subfields of Digital Humanities. Using computational methods with
digitized text materials, we can obtain systematic findings that can complement
traditional qualitative analyses. Although computational methods can be
powerful tools for investigating issues in literary studies, perspective in
novels has rarely been analyzed with such method.Against this background, we used computational
stylistic methods, i.e., text classification and feature analyses by random
forests machine learning methods, to tackle the perspective issue in literary
studies. We selected Kotaro Isaka, who is a popular Japanese novelist, as the
object of study; he explicitly switches perspective in his novels section by
section, and this is an important reason for the popularity of his novels. Note
that Haruki Murakami, another popular novelist, uses this perspective switching
between two perspectives (Kudo et al., 2012). However, Isaka uses more varied
perspective-switching patterns (Yamashita and Suzuki, 2013). First, we generated
text files and applied morphological analysis. We then conducted random forests
text classification and feature extraction experiments using text-feature
matrices for two of Isaka’s novels. Then, we investigated (a) whether textual
differences among perspectives can be detected or not, and (b) if detected,
what types of textual characteristics contribute to the detection of perspective.
By tackling these points, we will show the effectiveness of computational
methods for analyzing the perspective issue in literary studies.We selected
the following novels by Kotaro Isaka, “Odyubon no Inori” (Audubon’s Prayer; ADP,
original 2000, pocket edition 2003) and “Gurasuhoppa” (Grasshopper; GHP, original
2004, pocket edition 2007) as objects. ADP is a work representative of the
earlier period of the author’s bibliography, and GHP is representative of the
author’s middle period. We used the pocket editions of these two novels because
Isaka is known to revise manuscripts when his work is published in pocket
editions. We constructed the texts using a OCR document scanner and manually
corrected OCR errors. We also removed the rubi, i.e., kanas printed alongside
kanjis. We applied morphological analysis using MeCab,[1]
Japanese morphological analyzer.We divided the texts into sections and
assigned perspective tags according to the perspective signs assigned by the
author. Regarding ADP, we united all character perspectives except Ito, the central
character, because the number of perspectives for each character is small.
Without unification of perspective, it was difficult to perform meaningful
classification and feature analysis experiments. Thus, we used two tags, Ito’s
perspective and other characters’ perspectives. The numbers of sections was 56
for Ito and 22 for other characters. It should be noted that Ito’s section
appeared after another of his section. Regarding GHP, we used three tags for
the three main characters’ perspectives (Suzuki, Kujira, and Semi) according to
the signs assigned by the author. The sequences of these three characters’ perspectives
are essentially fixed, Suzuki first, Kujira second, and Semi third. In
addition, the death of a character leads to the removal of that character’s perspective.
The numbers of sections was 17 for Suzuki, 15 for Kujira, and 10 for Semi. We calculated the frequencies of
morphemes and basic textual statistics, and then we constructed the
text-feature matrices using the relative frequencies of morphemes appearing in
each text. We applied random forests machine learning methods proposed by Breiman
(2001) with these matrices as data and perspectives as labels. We calculated the
valuable importance provided by random forests and extracted important variables
for classification, which are effective for differentiation among perspectives.
We selected the random forests method because it has shown the best possible
performance for authorship attribution in Japanese (Jin and Murakami, 2007) and
is effective for extracting and analyzing the features that contribute to
classification in related tasks such as computational sociolinguistics (Suzuki,
2009).Table1. Basic data (ADP)



 Table 1
shows the basic data for ADP, the number of texts, and the sum, mean, standard
deviation (s.d.), and coefficient of variations (c.v.) of the number of tokens
for each perspective. It can be seen that Ito has more that 70% of all sections,
and others have larger variances of the c.v. It is assumed that the larger
variances were caused by the unification of characters. Table 2. Basic data (GHP)



 
Table 2 lists the basic data for GHP, the
number of texts, and the sum, mean, s.d., and c.v. of the number of tokens for
each perspective. The table shows that Suzuki has the largest section numbers
and has the largest c.v. It is assumed that Suzuki’s perspective includes both
small and long sections.Table
3. Classification results (ADP)



 Table 3
shows the classification results obtained by random forests for ADP. Each
column represents the original tags, and each row represents the results. It
can be seen that 55 of 56 Ito texts were classified as Ito’s. It is assumed
that Ito’s perspectives have special characteristics. In comparison, only 5 of 22
texts by others were classified as others and 17 of 22 texts by others were
classified as Ito. It is assumed that these results were partly caused by the
limits of our experiments; the number of Ito texts was much larger than others,
and the text from several characters was merged.

 

         Table 4. Classification results
(GHP)



 Table 4 shows the classification results
obtained by random forests for GHP. Each column represents the original tags,
and each row shows the results given by random forests. It can be seen that all
Suzuki texts were 17 were classified as Suzuki’s, and all Kujira texts were
classified as Kujira’s. Only 5 of 10 texts were classified as Semi, and 5 other
texts were classified as Kujira. It is assumed that there were special
characteristics for Suzuki and Kujira’s perspective; however, in comparison, Semi’s
perspectives were rather characterless and closer in nature to Kujira’s texts.
It is worth noting that both Semi and Kujira are assassins, and Suzuki is an
employee; therefore, it is assumed that the fact that Semi and Kujira are
similar characteristics indicates the author’s intent to differentiate these
two characters and Suzuki.Table 5. Top 20 important features
(ADP)



Table 5
shows the top 20 variables that contributed to classification of ADP with English
translations, indicates parts of speech, and shows the variable importance
obtained by random forests. The variables include many proper nouns and content
words such as “島” (Shima; Island) which simply represent contextual
difference in the narrative. Table 5 also includes stylistic characteristics such
as pronouns that represent the differences between the perspectives of Ito and
others.

Table 6. Top 20 important features
          (GHP) 



Table 6 shows the top 20 variables that
contributed to the classification of GHP with translations in English, indicates
part of speech and presents the variable importance obtained by random forests.
Table 6 includes many [part of] proper nouns, indicating that they are the most
important characteristics for discriminating the perspectives of the three main
characters. In addition, Table 6 includes “つう” (Tsuu) and “ねえ” (Nee), which are style markers specific to several characters (e.g., Kujira)
This indicates that these special style markers are also important characteristics
for discriminating the perspectives among the three main characters.This study
analyzed the textual difference among perspectives in two contemporary Japanese
novels. The results indicate that (a) respective perspectives have their
specific textual characteristics, (b1) textual characteristics such as proper
nouns that represent respective scenes are important for discriminating perspectives,
and (b2) stylistic characteristics such as pronouns and nouns that represent
styles of speech are also important. We conclude that computational stylistic
methods can differentiate among perspectives in contemporary novels. This study is a preliminary analysis of the
study of perspectives using computational stylistic methods and is also part of
an ongoing study of Kotaro Isaka’s work. In future, we would like to further investigate
the effectiveness of computational methods for perspective issues and continue
to analyze other work by Kotaro Isaka.This study was supported by Grant-in-Aid
for Scientific Research 23700288 for Young Scientists (B), from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan. An earlier version
of this study was presented at the 19th Annual Meeting of Japanese Natural
Language Processing (NLP2008) at Nagoya University. This research includes
revised and expanded content based on the gradation thesis presented by Natsumi
Yamashita to the Faculty of Sociology, Toyo University.Breiman L. (2001) Random
            forests, Machine Learning, Vol.45,
            pp.5-23.Isaka, K. (2003) Odyubon
            no Inori,Sincho Bunko, Tokyo.Isaka, K. (2007)
            Gurasuhoppa, Kadokawa Bunko, Tokyo.Ishimaru, A. (1985)
            Bunsyo ni okeru shiten, Nihongogaku, 4(12), 22-31.Jin, M. and M. Murakami
            (2007) Authorship identification using random forests, Proceedings of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 55(2),
            255-268.Kudo, A., Murai, H. and
            A. Tokosumi (2012) Kyotsu go no fuchi to henka ni motoduku heiko keisiki
              syosetsu no monogatari kouzo, Journal of
            Japan Society of Information and Knowledge, 22(3) 187-202. Suzuki, T. (2009)
            Extracting speaker-specific functional expressions from political speeches
              using random forests in order to investigate speakers' political styles, Journal of the American Society for
            Information Science and Technology, 60(8), 1596-1606.Yamashita, N. and T. Suzuki (2013) Keiryo tekisuto bunseki wo mochiita
            syosetsu no shiten kenkyu: Isaka Kotaro wo rei to shite, Proceedings of 19th Annual Meeting of the Association of Natural
            Language Processing (NLP2013), P1-3
            (www.anlp.jp/proceedings/annual_meeting/2013).mecab.sourceforge.net