Our software HISTOGLOBE visualises historical events and developments on a three-
dimensional globe and map. With the help of a
timeline users can explore history interactively.
In order to emphasize certain aspects of
history or in order to make the map more or
less detailed several filters can be used.
Zooming in and out enables the user to see
more or less details. It is designed to be highly
user-friendly with an intuitive handling. Fig. 1: Simplified HistoGlobe MockupHISTOGLOBE is based on a simple web-browser. Thereby, it can be also be used by
smartphone and tablet.
The software enables researchers to visualize their topics concerning long and short time
developments with a broad regional expansion. Of course, the historical events can be
connected with all kinds of (digital) sources, such as documents, pictures and videos. Thereby,
HISTOGLOBE enables scientists as well as for example museums and galleries to present their
topics in a unique way.
Our current prototype shows the development of the European Union on the basis of nearly
60 events. In order to use the advantages of a visualization tool, countries as a whole can also
be highlighted. Thereby, the growth of the European Union is depicted vividly. Picture 2 shows
an exemplary date during which the Federal Republic of Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands,
Luxemburg, France and Italy are highlighted to show their connection. The stars highlight
several events related to the development of the European Union. These events imply a short
description and can be matched with sources, such as pictures, videos, audio-files and
documents. Of course, the description can also lead to related websites and further
information. Fig. 2: Developments of countries, taken from www.histoglobe.comFig. 3: Single events are connected with multimedia elementsWithin the next months we will be able to show different types of events, several filters,
connections between events and animations. Of course, HISTOGLOBE can apply different
languages.
During the conference we would like to present our visualisation of World War I. which we are
currently developing with students at the Justus-Liebig-University Giessen. Conference visitors
will be able to use the visualisation and navigate through the course of history using a laptop.
If visitors are interested, we are open to show how historical events are implemented in the
software and which techniques were used.
In addition, we would like to show how HISTOGLOBE has been in use in several museums in
Germany and how it was already used by teachers and students to create their own version of
HISTOGLOBE. Based on these examples, we would like to invite academics to discuss how
future research could be visualised using HISTOGLOBE.
Our multidisciplinary team consists of six (PhD-) students. En detail, we are three computer
scientists, two historians and one business student. Our project is supported by the Heinz
Nixdorf Foundation and the Foundation of German Business. The first prototype was
developed at the Åbo Akademi in Turku, Finland. We already cooperate with the Bauhaus-
University Weimar and the Justus-Liebig-University Giessen. 