Despite the significance of digital technologies
to contemporary culture, scholars across the mainstream academy have been slow
to publish “discipline-based scholarship produced with digital tools and
presented in digital form”(Ayers, 2013). In part, this dearth results from many
researchers lacking (or lacking access to) required skills (a learned
capability, such as programming expertise) and competencies (a more abstract
ability in a particular domain, such as transdisciplinary collaboration). While
some centers and programs excel at supporting digital scholarship, many
institutions are trying to determine what skills are needed to produce such
work and how to cultivate them (Sehat and Farr, 2009). Our benchmarking study
thus examines how leading digital scholarship (DS) programs around the world
define and nurture skills and competencies. With the support of the Mellon
Foundation, we are conducting site visits and gathering data at four locations
in the United States, one in Canada, two in Europe, and three in the BRICS
countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa). As a result of this
research, we hope to help institutions create strategies for supporting digital
scholarship, inform the development of educational and professional development
programs, and contribute a global perspective to the ongoing discussion about
DS training. Although this study is necessarily constrained to approximately
ten sites, we hope that it provides the foundation for further work. Through benchmarking, we aim to understand the
key workforce-related factors instrumental to a center’s, department’s or program’s
success. In order to
consider a range of methodological approaches and foster cross-disciplinary
inquiry, we define digital scholarship broadly as creating, producing,
analyzing, and/or disseminating scholarship using new technologies, with an
emphasis on digital and computational techniques. Digital scholarship includes
both creating and analyzing “born digital” content and bringing new meaning to
digitized content, such as through textual analysis. Our study looks at digital
scholarship not only in the humanities, but also in the social sciences. We are
investigating both physical centers and distributed DS services and activities,
which are often, but not always, located in a university library. In addition,
we are examining to what extent cultural, institutional, disciplinary and
national contexts influence what skills are important. This poster will serve as an interim report on
the study, outlining its goals, methods, and initial high-level observations.
In selecting sites, we are considering criteria such as what research services
they offer, staff expertise, numbers of different kinds of staff, reputation,
and record of innovative, successful projects, as well as the program’s
involvement with significant professional development and/or educational
programs. We aim for geographical, cultural and disciplinary diversity. During our site visits, we are
conducting semi-structured interviews with key faculty, graduate students,
research staff, and administrators, asking questions such as what skills matter
most to their work and how ideally to develop them. We are also gathering benchmarking data such as the skills of staff,
the center’s support for professional development, and its approaches to
developing digital scholarship.By the time of the conference, we expect to have
completed at least six of our site visits, including to locations in the United
States, Canada, China, and Europe. Thus we will share general patterns emerging
from the study, including the preliminary core skills and competencies that we
have identified. We will also explore how centers develop these skills, such as
by providing dedicated time for exploratory research and development work,
hosting visiting scholars, enabling staff to teach, supporting training and
conference travel, and fostering a “learning culture.” We will discuss the
challenges in conducting the study, including identifying “best in class”
digital scholarship programs in a global context, ensuring diversity in what
centers and programs are represented, coordinating visits, and deciding what
kind of data is important to collect and how best to capture that data. Through
our interactive poster session, we will solicit feedback on our work to date
and identify opportunities to expand our research.Ayers, Edward L. (2013) “Does digital scholarship have a future?”EDUCAUSE Review, vol. 48, no. 4
            (July/August 2013)Sehat, Connie Moon, and Erika Farr. (2009) The Future of Digital Scholarship: Preparation, Training, Curricula.
            Report of a Colloquium on Education in Digital Scholarship, April 17–18, 2009.
            Washington, DC: Council on Library and Information Resources, 2009. www.clir.org/pubs/archives/SehatFarr2009.pdf.Zorich, Diane (2008). A Survey of
            Digital Humanities Centers in the United States. Washington, DC: Council on
            Library and Information Resources.
            http://www.clir.org/pubs/abstract/pub143abst.html.