This poster
reports on work conducted during 2010-2012 in the context of EHRI – the European Holocaust Research Infrastructure, as well
as work in progress in the context of Europeana
Cloud - Unlocking Europe’s Research via the Cloud. Its purpose is to
investigate any differentiations between the research practices of humanists
and social scientists as identified within the User Requirements work conducted
in the context of those two EU Research Infrastructure Projects (Benardou
et.al. 2013, Benardou et.al. 2010), by demonstrating the points of divergence
and convergence of humanists and social scientists with regard to their
scholarly research activities in a concise and illustrated format. In the
context of EHRI the Digital Curation
Unit, “ATHENA” R.C. (DCU) was responsible for the identfication, modeling and formalization
of the requirements of EHRI users –
largely text-based humanists but also social and political scientists. To this
end, DCU identified and analysed scholarly research practices and focused on
the use of archival materials in the area of Holocaust Studies, as well as scholarly
research practices in the digital domain and how these might support and
enhance research in Holocaust Studies, in order to create a set of data and
functional requirements based upon the analysis of scholarly research
practices. The quantitative part of this research, complementary to a series of
semi-structured interviews with Holocaust researchers, consisted of an online
questionnaire survey which covered the relative use of different kinds of
digital and analog resources, the perceived importance of specific information
activities used by researchers (covering the span from information seeking to
collaboration, including entry points), perceptions towards sharing and
trustworthiness of resources, computer/device use and work location, and demographic/control
variables such as country of residence, researcher status, expertise in
archival research methods etc. 82,28% of the respondents of this survey were
Humanists, predominantly historians, while the rest came from the Social
Sciences.Within Europeana Cloud, DCU is leading the
Workpackage responsible for the improvement of the understanding of digital tools, research processes
and content used in the Humanities and Social Sciences, thus informing the
development of tools and content strategy in Europeana Cloud. To this end, amongst other user-centred approaches
such as a series of Expert Fora, DCU designed a Research Communities Web Survey
to analyze digital research practices, tools and content to gather
evidence-based data from the Humanities (75,38%) and Social Sciences research
community (24,62%), focusing in particular on the potential use of content from
Europeana and The European Library.Humanistic
and Social Sciences have by and large been perceived as two associated fields
for which often the study of scholarly work adopts related if not identical
strategies. Significant examples include the work of Ellis’ team, who identified six common processes across disciplines spearheaded by qualitative
work, fuelled by grounded theory research on research communities across the Social
Sciences and the Humanities. Moreover, in a more
recent study of the University of Washington (2005) on the use of digital
sources, researchers in these two disciplines were perceived as comparable with
regards to their approaches and the methods they adopted. In this light,
similarities rather than discrepancies were stressed.  Such an
approach is indeed largely reasoned, given the fact that the Humanities and
Social Sciences broadly share methods and objects, and are obviously closer to
each other when compared to, e.g., the Physical Sciences. However, many scientific
papers on research information behaviour have differentiated the two fields.
For instance, an interesting survey conducted by the British Academy on e-resources
for research in the Humanities and Social Sciences (2005) stresses the
different research approaches across the two fields. On discussing the
questionnaire and the recorded answers, the authors distinguish the views
expressed by humanists and social scientists, thus reaching conclusions on
their distinct characteristics with regard to digital content.It seems
therefore interesting to investigate research activities in the Humanities and
Social Sciences separately yet comparatively, in order to define whether there could
be any reasonable ground for differentiation in the design and implementation
of future infrastructures. To this end, we will be looking into issues
addressed in both EHRI and Europeana Cloud online questionnaires,
such as the use of specific tools and services, the research activities in
which the users engage, the content as well as the properties of the resources
favored by the users and the degree of agreement regarding specific statements
concerning the overall research process, in an attempt to trace, identify and
highlight similarities and differences on issues of workflow, concurrency,
microactivities relating to information seeking behavior, aiming at mapping out
research practices at such granular level as to gather detailed information on
current research practices among different user groups engaged in the
Humanities and Social Sciences, which could act as a reference point and
information resource for the formulation of data requirements and functional
specifications for future infrastructures.Bass,
        A.,  Fairlee J., Fox K. & Sullivan J.
        (2005). The Information Behavior of
          Scholars in the Humanities and Social sciences. University of Washington.Benardou, A., Constantopoulos P.
          & Dallas C. (2013). An Approach to Analysing Working Practices of Research
            Communities in the Humanities. International
          Journal of History and Arts Computing, 7.1-2, 105-127.Benardou A., P. Constantopoulos, C. Dallas & D. Gavrilis (2010).
          Understanding the information requirements of arts and humanities scholarship:
            Implications for digital curation. International
          Journal of Digital Curation5,
          no. 1Ellis, D.
          (1993). Modeling the information-seeking patterns of academic researchers: A
            grounded theory approach. The Library Quarterly, 63(4), 469-486. Jones, K., and Bennett, R., “E-resources for
          research in the Humanities and Social sciences: A British Academic Policy
          Review”, British Academy, April 2005, pp. 1-116.