DARIAH-DE supports digitally-enabled research and teaching in the arts and humanities. The project is developing a research infrastructure, which will offer tools, core services, and access to research data as well as materials for research and education in the digital humanities (DH). The central objective of DARIAH-DE is to enable the interoperability of tools and research data. Following internationally valid and accepted standards and policies, DARIAH-DE aims to ensure the long-term preservation and future use of research data. DARIAH-DE also supports and advises researchers as well as research projects in planning and accomplishing humanities research initiatives within a digital environment. Effective ways of handling digital resources, concepts, and methods in the digital humanities must be introduced into training and instruction for humanities researchers at all educational and career levels. In close consultation with disciplinary communities, DARIAH-DE coordinates and (where necessary) further develops existing study and training courses. Moreover, DARIAH-DE is developing individual qualification modules, such as international workshops for experts dealing with specific themes. This infrastructure will enable researchers to carry out research in an increasingly digital environment, across disciplines and institutions in collaborative ways and towards sustainable results.For the first two and a half years of the DARIAH-DE project, the computing centers and software partners participating in the consortium have laid the groundwork for the establishment of a sustainable technical infrastructure based on the requirements and needs of researchers in the arts and humanities. Although a productive research infrastructure now exists, there are still some requirements to be addressed in the coming years, together with representatives from the computing centers, the information specialists and the software developers, and partners from the various disciplines in the humanities. As a research-driveninfrastructure project, DARIAH-DE demonstrates that both research projects as well as national and international collaborations in particular need sustainable research infrastructures. Currently there are more than 500 researchers from a wide spectrum of disciplines in the humanities and about 35 projects using the options and services provided by DARIAH-DE, such as the Confluence Wiki system, the Developer Portal, and resources such as VMs, storage, and discipline-specific services. To enhance the stability and usability of research data, DARIAH-DE is building a research data repository for the arts and humanities. This repository supports both the storage of data in the creation process as well as the long-term preservation of research data.DARIAH-DE is a reliable research infrastructure in Germany for the arts and humanities in the field of research, teaching and research data. It is, furthermore, the German national contribution to the European research infrastructure DARIAH-EU within the framework of ESFRI. External research projects from the arts and humanities and service- or tool providers are invited to cooperate with DARIAH-DE to provide their services and tools in the DARIAH-DE research infrastructure.The aim of this DARIAH-DE poster presentation at the DH 2014 in Lausanne is not only to present a poster describing DARIAH-DE; it will also include a multi-media presentation of different kind of demonstrators in the fields of research, teaching, research data, and technical infrastructure. The conference participants will be presented with a broad variety of (re-usable) specific and interdisciplinary tools and services from the DARIAH-DE research infrastructure. The overall objective of the multimedia presentation is to show a variety of DARIAH-DE tools and services ready for researchers to use. Examples include DIGIVOY, a bundle of text analysis tools, the DARIAH-DE Geo-Browser, a tool to analyze time-spatial relations, the Collection Registry and a generic search engine. We will also present tools for collaborative work as well as our service-oriented web portal (de.dariah.eu), based on Liferay, which allows for the embedding of externally-developed services and tools.More information about the German project DARIAH-DE and the European project DARIAH-EU can be found here: https://de.dariah.eu/ (German) and https://www.dariah.eu (English).Contact address:  dariah-sub@sub.uni-goettingen.deWebsite: https://de.dariah.eu/