There has been an increase in
the recognition of Digital Humanities (DH) projects as legitimate forms of
Humanities research (MLA 2007). Although much work has been done to convince
our colleagues that digital research is worthy, a pending problem is that they do
not necessarily have the knowledge or tools to evaluate DH work (Rockwell, 2011).
Most DH projects are not presented in traditional research output formats such
as articles or books, but take on various formats such as development of
metadata, textual markup, tools, websites and others (Schreibman et.al, 2011), so many evaluation
committees are at loss with how to deal with these materials. At the same time,
people developing a DH project do not necessarily know what elements should be
included. Although there are places in the world where
advanced and sophisticated DH projects exist, the vast majority are individual
and modest efforts with little access to or knowledge about best DH practices.  This issue becomes particularly acute in
emergent DH communities, such as Mexico, where there is little accumulated
practical experience.  In previously held
workshops of the RedHD (Galina 2012; Galina & Priani 2011), where issues
related to developing and promoting DH in the region were addressed, we concluded
that one important aspect was providing both DH creators as well as evaluators
with mechanisms for recognizing and evaluating the importance and impact of DH
projects. We therefore decided to develop an online tool
for the evaluation of DH project in order to promote the recognition and
evaluation of DH work, consisting of a set of guidelines coupled with an online
checklist that allows users to evaluate a particular resource using an
interface that displays the results of the evaluation, indicating areas of
weakness and of strength. The aim of this tool is threefold: step-by-step
evaluation tool for committees, a resource for developers and as an informal
compliance of a minimum standard.A literature review of
relevant guidelines was undertaken and an ad
hoc committee was created to discuss the findings.  Other tools were found to be either too
specific or general (MLA 2012; Presner 2012; MLA 2011; Warwick 2007; Unsworth
2001) and additionally they were all provided as static document-based
resources. Based on this, guidelines were proposed and divided
into sections: Authorship and Attribution, Documentation, Quality Control,
Rights Management and Visibility and Dissemination, were created. We then
extracted simple yes, no or not applicable questions in order to build up a
checklist that corresponded to the guidelines. The checklist was then
transferred online and we developed a punctuation system depending on the
answers. The results are then displayed by section and overall performance. The tool was reviewed by an expert group of 16
people. Each person was assigned five DH projects to evaluate from a random
sample taken from the RedHD DH project database. A follow up meeting with all
participants was used to discuss their experience and several modifications
were made to the tool until a consensus was reached. Creating an online resource
for evaluating and building a DH project was a necessary but challenging
endeavor.  DH resources are heterogeneous
and their objectives vary widely. It is therefore difficult to condense into a checklist
DH desirable characteristics that are not too specific but at the same time
manage to incorporate issues that are particular to DH projects and not to
web-based projects in general.  In addition
we wanted our tool to address different types of audiences: creators and
evaluators of DH resources whom would have different degrees of DH knowledge
and expertise. Choosing simple and clear language for the best practices was a
challenge. In addition, as we were able to ascertain from the discussions
during the committee meetings, there are no clear and definite answers and this
tool will probably have to be adjusted continuously as DH work and the
technologies evolve and will require continuous community consensus.  In the following months the tool will be
tried out with two other user groups: a group of inexpert colleagues who are
developing for a DH project for the first time and an evaluation committee that
provides small funding grants for UNAM projects.  The feedback from these exercises will also
be incorporated as the work on this tool continues.  We do believe however, that this tool that
provides an informal certification of compliance will aid in the process of
recognition of the validity of DH projects as it gives both creators and
evaluators a general standard to which DH projects can be measured against. Galina, I.Retos
            para la creación de recursos digitales en las Humanidades, El Profesional de
            la Información, 21(2), pp185-189, 2012 (ISSN: 1386-6710)Galina, I., Priani, E.,
            López, J., Rivera, E., Cruz, A.Tejiendo
              la Red HD- A case study of buidling a DH network in Mexico, Digital
            Humanities 2012, Conference abstracts, Hamburg, Germany. 16 - 22  July 2012, ISBN 978-3-937816-99-9, pp.456-458MLA
            (2007). Report of the MLA Task Force on
              Evaluating Scholarship for Tenure and Promotion, 2007, Modern Language
            Association, p.71MLA (2011),
            Guidelines for Editors of Scholarly
              Editions, Modern Language Association, 2011. MLA (2012), Guidelines for Evaluating Work in Digital
            Humanities and Digital Media, Created 2000, last reviewed 2012.Presner,
            T. (2011). How to evaluate digital
            scholarship, http://humanitiesblast.com/Evaluating_digital_scholarship.pdfRockwell,
            G. (2011) On the Evaluation of Digital
            Media as Scholarship, Profession, 2011, pp. 152-168, 10.1632/prof.2011.2011.1.152Schreibman,
            L., Mandell, L., et. al., (2011)  Evaluating Digital Scholarship – Introduction,
            Profession 2011, pp. 123-201, 10.1632/prof.2011.2011.1.123Warwick,
            C; Terras, M. et. al.(2007)
            Evaluating Digital Humanities Resources: The LAIRAH Project Checklist and the
            Internet Shakespeare Editions Project. In: (Proceedings) ELPUB 2007.Unsworth,
            J. (2001) University of Virginia, Evaluating Digital Scholarship, Promotion
            & Tenure Cases.
            http://artsandsciences.virginia.edu/dean/facultyemployment/evaluating_digital_scholarship.htmlUNAM, Disposiciones Generales
            para la Actividad Editorial de la UNAM, cited in López, C. and Estrada, A., Edición y Derechos de Autor en las
            Publicaciones de la UNAM, 2007. UNAM, Recursos web – Lineamientos CATIC. http://recursosweb.unam.mx/recursos-web/lineamientos-unam/