The main idea is to find out how to edit a collection of oral
transmitted texts of literary interest (often called orature), in the
future resulting as a marked-up database, serving as a model to future
researchers and projects. The main goal is to analyse both the transcribed texts
and the way they are performed orally. Until today, several research areas
focus on particular parts of this kind of enunciation – Literary studies
concentrate on the transcription, Anthropologic studies concentrate on the
artistic performance or on the interactants’ behavior, etc. But nowadays we
have the means that allow us to study a more complete contextualization of an
oral composition, and interaction including voice characteristics (intonation,
prosody), body movements (face, torso, arms, hands) and proxemic behaviour (the
relation between an interviewee and the interviewer). My presentation will
focus on the main parts of my PhD project: a) the creation of a representative
corpus of Portuguese oral tradition with performative and literary annotation,
b) digital publication of a more complete edition model, and c) gesture and
literary classification.From previous incipient work done on oral
prayers themed on the Passion of the Christ, it proved to be productive to
assume that performance integrates verbal art in its many strands. Performative
elements have given some hints on their importance, having this previous study
focus on the intonational contrast between the informant ́s enunciation of a
prayer and in spontaneous speech.Fig. 1: Image A – spontaneous speechFig. 2: Image B – enunciation of prayer a)Fig. 3: Image C – enunciation of prayer b)In image A ascending and descending
melodic variations contours can me seen, characteristic of human speech. In
images B and C, F0, paradoxically, is almost flat, indicating a type of
monotonous speech, showing a lowering of the medium tone of voice of the
speaker in question. Moreover, the total duration of each one of the extracts,
the informant produces a greater amount of words during prayer enunciation than
in conversation mode in which, as indicated in A, disfluencies or pauses occur,
which rarely occur during prayer ennunciation. These characteristics are due to
the fact that, among other reasons, discourse planning is slower during
conversation that during prayer enunciation (being a discourse cited by memory,
not involving simultaneous processing to the production).



Concluding, the above-explained study
shows these to be performative marks to the production of a prayer orally and
it gives us hints to question whether other types of orally transmitted texts
have them or not.The data is being collected through
fieldwork interviews and archival research, which result in the primary
database in video and audio formats that share a common structure for storage.
Each entry is accompanied by metadata related to the context of collection:
informant’s data, place and date, technical information about support files.
The data is worked to ensure time alignment of the different types of
representation: transcription of the text, kinesic and verbal (not literary)
markup. To this end, the programs being used until now are 'EXMARaLDA' – for
the alignment of text and video annotation –, and 'Praat' for intonation and
prosodic analysis of the compositions. Together, these elements constitute the
support for the database analysis: literary classification according to the
taxonomic reference indexes, annotation of text versions and variants, motifs
(using AMICUS network labelling), UNESCO intangible heritage taxonomy and
Matriz PCI, formal characterization of the text (composition, data
contamination or counterfeiting, domain – religious, artistic, etc. –
fictionality degree), linked existing Wikipedia entries for each type of text,
and literary and compositional
context. This way, the database will gather several interpretations on the same
composition, letting the user/researcher work with the information that suits
their interests.