The HathiTrust Digital Library includes over 10
million volumes digitized from more than 90 research libraries. The HathiTrust
Research Center (HTRC) has been established to help scholars get the most from this massive
text corpus by providing cutting-edge tools, services and cyberinfrastructure
that enable advanced computational access to the HathiTrust corpus. An immediate
objective for HTRC is to allow scholars to collect items together for computational
analysis. This has required rethinking the HathiTrust metadata model,
inherited from print-based library cataloging traditions. This poster describes
the motivation for this work, shortcomings of the current metadata model, and
requirements driving the updated model. Humanities
scholars regularly create collections in the course of their research –
selecting, gathering, and organizing materials from disparate sources to answer
specific research questions 12. As scholars increasingly rely on digital sources, they need sophisticated tools for the
management and manipulation of “custom collections” of digital texts 3 4 56 7 89.The HTRC workset creation tools will allow users to formally gather selected subsets of the HathiTrust corpus together for computational analysis. Early user studies 10 suggest several requirements, e.g.: Fig. 1: Fig. 1: Creating worksets for scholarly analysisItems in the
HathiTrust corpus today are described exclusively by MARC. While MARC is the
predominant bibliographic metadata standard used in libraries, it is proving inadequate to support the creation of scholarly
worksets from large digital repositories such as the HathiTrust. To begin with MARC can accommodate
only a fraction of properties of texts and their contexts that are of interest
to scholars. For example, the MARC bibliographic format does not provide fields
for describing an author’s gender, nationality, religion or social
relationships. In addition, library catalogers rarely use the full expressiveness potential of MARC.
The MARC specification defines more than 1,900 fields. However, most bibliographic
records contain only a handful of these 11. Table 1 illustrates the use of MARC fields across the 6 million
HathiTrust bibliographic records. Additionally fields used vary by class of text. Table 2 illustrates how infrequently subject headings are used in describing fictional works.With the generous support of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis (WCSA) project, a collaboration between the HTRC and 4 independent research groups (competitively selected from among 15 respondents to a Request For Proposals issued in November 2013), is exploring answers to the following intertwined questions:In reporting on these questions, we expect to articulate recommendations
to move away from a solely MARC-based metadata architecture towards a more
RDF-centric metadata architecture relying on multiple library-specific and
non-library standards, e.g., MARC, MODS, DC, SKOS, FOAF, schema.org, etc.1. Brogan, M. (2006). Contexts and Contributions: Building the Distributed Library. Digital Library Federation/Council on Library and Information Resources. Retrieved August2, 2010 from www.diglib.org/pubs/dlf1062. Palmer, C. L. (2005). Scholarly work and the shaping of digital access. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 56(11), 1140-1153.
          3. Dempsey, L. (2006). The (digital) library environment: Ten years after. Ariadne, 46. Retrieved February 13, 2013 from www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue46/dempsey/4. Green, H., Saylor, N.,& Courtney, A. (2013). Beyond the scanned image: A needs assessment of faculty users of digital collections. Digital Humanities 2013, Lincoln, Nebraska.
          5. Mueller, M. (2010). Towards a Digital Carrel: A Report about Corpus Query Tools, retrieved September 17, 2013 from panini.northwestern.edu/mmueller/corpusquerytools.pdf6. Spiro, L., & Segal, J. (2005). The Impact of Digital Resources on Humanities Research, retrieved October 31, 2013 from library.rice.edu/services/dmc/about/projects/the-impact-of-digital-resources-on-humanities-research7. Warwick, C., Terras, M., Huntington, P., & Pappa, N. (2008). If you build it will they come? The Lairah Study: Quantifying the use of online resources in the arts and humanities through statistical analysis of user log data. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(1), 85-102.
          8. Sukovic, S. (2008). Convergent flows: Humanities scholars and their interactions with electronic texts. Library Quarterly 78(3), 263-284.
          9. Sukovic, S.(2011). E-Texts in Research Projects in the Humanities. In A. Woodsworth & W. D. Penniman (Eds.) Advances in Librarianship (131-202). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing.
          10. Green, H., Fenlon, K., Senseney, M., Bhattacharyya, S., Willis, C., Organisciak, P., Downie, J. S., Cole, T., and Plale, E. (2014). Using collections and worksets in large-scale corpora: Preliminary findings from the Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis project. Forthcoming paper to be presented at iConference 2014, Berlin, Germany.
          11. Moen, William E. & Benardino, P. (2003). Assessing Metadata Utilization: An Analysis of MARC Content Designation Use. 2003 Dublin Core Conference: Supporting Communities of Discourse and Practice — Metadata Research and Application, Seattle, Wash. Retrieved October 31, 2013 from www.unt.edu/wmoen/publications/MARCPaper_Final2003.pdf