 In this poster session, we present the project of the Public Philosophy Journal and our plans for cultivating a community of engaged scholars to sustain it. The presentation will explain our motivations for designing the journal to perform public philosophy as its mode of publication, highlight the journal’s role as a hub for community-sourced curation and review of existing work, and introduce our model for the collaborative writing and editing of publicly engaged scholarship. We will draw attention to common aims of differing conceptions of public philosophy, and discuss how the PPJ will leverage digital media in promoting both reasoned deliberation concerning the public good and the modeling of virtues of thought, expression, and action within the public sphere.The last two decades have seen an increase in the urgency with which public universities and professional societies in the United States have turned to reflect on the culture of isolation and detachment that has come to characterize much of contemporary academic work. Nowhere, perhaps, has this reflection been more necessary in making the case for continued institutional and public support than in the discipline of philosophy. While changes in the academic culture of the discipline have been significant over the last twenty years, the model of publication that continues to dominate there serves to reinforce, rather than to undermine, the misperception that philosophical activity is essentially divorced from the concerns of public life. This model of publication remains valuable insofar as it rewards carefully researched and thoughtful work that meets the high intellectual standards of respected members of the discipline. However, the process through which work is prepared and approved for print publication is time-consuming, expensive, and constrained by a review process that favors technical work directed at problems framed by the discipline itself over work that takes up the shared responsibilities of public citizens. Ultimately, existing modes of scholarly publication are not well suited to provide timely, open, public access to philosophically informed work that addresses widely shared public concerns. They are similarly constrained when it comes to providing the general public with examples of the discursive and collaborative processes through which philosophically rigorous work is produced.The emergence of digital communication has brought important changes to the way philosophers produce scholarly work. Traditional publishers are also recognizing the opportunities digital media present for making scholarly work more widely available to various publics. Drawing on these developments, the Public Philosophy Journal (PPJ) is designed to leverage new modes of digital scholarly communication to produce and publish work that is equally responsive to the demands of public discourse and to the rigorous standards of academic publication.‘Community-sourcing’ stands as an alternative to the increasingly popular practice of ‘crowd-sourcing’. Rather than leveraging the resources of a loosely connected crowd located somewhere ‘out there’, the PPJ seeks to draw upon resources that already exist within groups of integrated, overlapping communities. These communities are made up of practitioners who are oriented towards common public concerns. In his book The Public and Its Problems, Dewey captures the public spirit that we see animating the “community-sourcing” approach of the PPJ:
    To learn to be human is to develop through the give-and-take of communication an effective sense of being an individually distinctive member of a community; one who understands and appreciates its beliefs, desires and methods, and who contributes to a further conversion of organic power into human resources and values.
  As a community in which one learns to be human in this sense, the PPJ’s publication practices will seek to curate and amplify the efforts of community members, thereby generating innovative connections across already existing communities, and carrying on the traditions of dialogue and rigorous scholarship within the forums emerging in the digital age.Curating digital conversations from around the web through existing web-crawling technologies, a network of graduate students in philosophy and a wider community of engaged citizens, the PPJ will identify contributions that might be further developed for scholarly publication in the journal. Authors of these contributions will then be invited into a collaborative, developmental writing space in order to prepare their work for open peer review. This open peer review process will include a system for reviewing and credentialing reviewers and incentives for careful reading and for consistent and thoughtful commenting. Accepted articles will be openly published in the journal together with invited responses to the reviewed work and links to the sources from which the articles developed. These practices of community-sourced scholarship are designed to enrich both public discourse and philosophical scholarship.This project is situated within a growing network of people who identify themselves as doing a kind of public philosophy. In Practicing Public Philosophy, Sharon M. Meagher and Ellen K. Feder report on three general positions on public philosophy taken by practitioners. The first identifies philosophical practice as a public good that should be practiced in the public sphere. The second frames public philosophy as philosophy aimed explicitly at benefitting the public. The third focuses on philosophical analysis as having a liberatory value in relation to existing structures of power. We agree with the authors that these three positions are not mutually exclusive. We also go beyond this claim in suggesting that the new era of digital media and communications provides us not only with a set of useful tools for enabling work that is described in these ways, but also with a set of opportunities and responsibilities with respect to the unifying theme that relates these positions to one another within a common project. We are focusing on a public sphere that exists not only ‘beyond the ivory tower’ but also beyond those physical spaces of public assembly that have long served as its rhetorical contrasts (e.g., cafes, bars, and theaters, to name only a few). We are also encouraging a view of our own responsibility to act as collaborative user-designers of the technological infrastructure required to generate and sustain this sphere in ways that are productive of the goods we seek in practicing philosophy. The online, open access, open peer review structure of the PPJ will enable it to model the public practice of philosophy, in a way that is explicitly aimed to benefit the various public spheres in which its members participate, and that serves to liberate practitioners from at least some of the existing constraints on its acceptable outcomes. The design of the journal itself will be guided by the idea that the most urgent issues of public concern are best addressed in and through public scholarly communication that puts the virtues of responsible public discourse into practice.We share with the community of scholars and practitioners that has emerged around the general topic of ‘online deliberation’ the hope that emerging digital media can be leveraged to promote and sustain reasoned, purposeful, and interactive communications surrounding issues of public urgency. We also share the concern that other commercial and academic interests may seek to prevent these potentially transformative media from being used to their fullest potential. Recent scholarship on communication and deliberative discourse in the digital age provides us with both a plurality of models for facilitating productive public deliberation and some emerging consensus around general best practices for avoiding the kinds of digression that are so common both in online and in more traditional communication contexts.The self-understanding of the community, cultivated through open shared public dialogue, is best positioned to shape the norms and guidelines according to which the journal puts public philosophy into practice. Accordingly, it is as important to us to community-source decisions about the policies to which contributors to the journal will be subject, and concerning the qualitative standards against which reviewers will themselves be reviewed, as it is to draw on the subject-matter expertise of community members in making decisions concerning the quality of the contribution made by any particular article under review.This opens us up to the criticism that we are being overly optimistic concerning the community’s capacity for fair, equitable, and open self-legislation. However, we would prefer to admit that possibility while working to provide examples of excellent public scholarly deliberative practices, than to prejudge the case in a way that simultaneously underestimates the community and undermines the public spirit of the project.However effective the PPJ is in cultivating habits of excellent public deliberation, if philosophers, activists, policy makers and citizens refuse to write and reflect publicly about the issues with which they are concerned, the wellspring from which PPJ intends to draw its content will run dry. This is no small challenge for many of us in the academy, since it requires and a willingness to subject our ideas the judgment of a much wider public, often at a much earlier stage in their development, than we have historically done. As Kathleen Fitzpatrick has written: “We too often keep our work as scholars hidden away from the cultural mainstream, pointing toward a pervasive anti-intellectualism that disqualifies the public from engaging with our ideas.” This presumption of anti-intellectualism is a poor rationalization for the continuing insular provincialism of the academy in general and the discipline of Philosophy in particular. Instead, as Fitzpatrick argues, “We must open ourselves up in order to be part of rather than apart from contemporary culture, and in order to do so, we need to expand and rethink the very idea of who our peers are today.”To expand and rethink who our peers are is in no small part the work of the Public Philosophy Journal. In this regard, the “public” is the first and last concern of the journal. It is the sphere from which its content arises, in which its work is vetted, refined and reviewed, and to which its claims are subject. The PPJ is designed to be public through and through.Here the difficult work of public scholarship, pursued and developed in public, can be seen to dovetail with and reinforce the importance of practices of public deliberation. The ultimate success of the PPJ will depend upon our ability to create a virtuous circle between public deliberation and public scholarship, between the manner in which the public engages and responds to work by philosophers, activists and policy makers and their willingness to expose their scholarly work to a wide and engaged public.  Such a virtuous circle is only possible in a cultivated community of participants willing to risk their ideas and engage one another responsibly. Through this, what Dewey called the “give-and-take of communication,” the Public Philosophy Journal seeks to cultivate a human and humane public scholarly community in a digital age.An overview of developments in the context of
            public universities can be found in Peters, Scott J. Engaging Campus and Community: The Practice of Public Scholarship in
              the State and Land-Grant University System. Dayton, Ohio: Kettering
            Foundation Press, 2005. Web. 6 Mar. 2014. The American Philosophical Association now has a
            committee devoted to promoting public engagement  (publicphilosophy.org/mission.html).Dewey, John (2008). The Later Works of John Dewey, Volume 2, 1925 - 1953: 1925-1927,
            Essays, Reviews, Miscellany, and the Public and Its Problems. SIU Press, 332.None of the many open access philosophy
            journals world-wide (see, www.doaj.org) incorporates all of
            these dimensions and none leverages open access in a way that so intrinsically
            links the content and the manner of its production to the mission of the
            journal. Digital Humanities Nowdigitalhumanitiesnow.org
            and its sister publication, The Journal
            of Digital Humanitiesjournalofdigitalhumanities.org come
            closest to the spirit of public scholarship the PPJ seeks to embody. Digital Humanities Now uses aggregation,
            curation, discovery and review to generate articles that appear ultimately in The Journal of Digital Humanities. We
            intend to integrate some of their practices of curation and aggregation into
            the workflow of the PPJ.This report from a 2010 meeting convened at the
            Pacific Division of the APA can be accessed here (publicphilosophynetwork.ning.com/page/founding-report).See, for example, the 2011 Kettering Foundation
            Report: The Promises and Problems of
              Public Deliberationkettering.org/publications. You can contribute to the PPJ’s Best Practices for
            Public Scholarly Deliberation by commenting on the draft we provide here: ppj.matrix.msu.edu/best-practices-for-public-scholarly-deliberationFitzpatrick, Kathleen (2011). Planned Obsolescence. New
            York: New York University Press, 17.Ibid., 17.