Librarians associated with the University of Iowa’s DIY History digitized manuscript archive and Rhetoric
faculty members and co-directors of Iowa Digital Engagement and Learning (IDEAL) will detail the
design, implementation, and assessment of a collaborative effort to connect a large crowdsourced
digital archive with an undergraduate primary research project for a general education rhetoric course.
The panel will discuss the ways in which librarians and rhetoric faculty worked together to create a
transcription crowdsourcing pilot project to meet learning objectives and how they devised and
implemented an assessment framework for the project. The panel will share outcomes of the
assessment together with recommendations for reinvigorating outdated, unimodal, or otherwise staid
assignments through crowdsourcing and multimodal composition.Jen Wolfe and Kelly McElroy - librarians associated with the University of Iowa’s DIY History digitized
manuscript archive - and Matt Gilchrist and Tom Keegan - Rhetoric faculty members and co-directors of
Iowa Digital Engagement and Learning (IDEAL) - will detail the design, implementation, and assessment
of a collaborative effort to connect a large crowdsourced digital archive with an undergraduate primary
research project for a general education rhetoric course.
Wolfe and McElroy will examine the outcomes of the DIY History initiative, specifically related to
attempts to move that crowdsourced resource into the General Education curriculum at Iowa. Gilchrist
and Keegan will detail the development and implementation of a rhetorical analysis assignment that
asks students to make use of digitized primary source material to create publicly available multimodal
compositions. The panel will discuss the ways in which librarians and rhetoric faculty worked together to
create a transcription crowdsourcing pilot project to meet learning objectives, and to devise and
implement an assessment framework for the project. The panel will share outcomes of the assessment
together with recommendations for reinvigorating outdated, unimodal, or otherwise staid assignments
through crowdsourcing and multimodal composition.Since its launch in 2011, the UI Libraries’ transcription crowdsourcing initiative has been an unqualified
success. Volunteers at the DIY History website have transcribed more than 35,000 pages of digitized
manuscripts ranging from Civil War diaries to suffragette meeting minutes to handwritten cookbooks.
The many benefits of the project include improved access to digital collections through full-text
searching of the transcripts, as well as new gifts of family papers from donors drawn to the initiative.
Perhaps most satisfying of all has been the deep and sustained engagement with the Libraries’
collections from dedicated transcribers around the world. Many users of the site have echoed this
volunteer’s sense of connection with the original writers of the documents: “These people come alive;
you come to share their hopes, their fears, their everyday concerns. You do become absorbed in the
people, and losing one of them is like losing a relative or a friend” (Miller). While the site has attracted
national and international audiences, until recently library staff has struggled with finding a user base on
campus. That has begun to change thanks to a partnership with IDEAL and the Rhetoric Department. 







					Supported by the Office of the Provost and The Studio for Public Digital Arts and Humanities, IDEAL
facilitates the design and implementation of digital, publicly-engaged pedagogies across the University.
IDEAL is co-directed by two faculty members in the Rhetoric Department. In 2012, the Rhetoric
Department began revisiting its emphasis on research in a general education course titled Rhetoric and
required of all undergraduates. Faculty agreed that while students had a good understanding of
rhetorical analysis, their perception and use of research in service to that analysis could be
strengthened. In collaboration with the Libraries, IDEAL developed a four-week assignment that
incorporates DIY History as a teaching tool in rhetoric classes. Students transcribe a handwritten
document from the DIY History manuscript archive; compose a blog post that attends to both the
rhetorical analysis of the document and its historical context; create a brief screencast outlining some
intriguing element of the document; and deliver an in-class presentation detailing their work. As a
result, students become familiar with primary source research through a public digital humanities
resource while they create multimodal documentation of their scholarship.Initial outcomes of this project illustrate the general motivating factors for participants of crowdsourcing
projects, including: producing meaningful work; encountering new information; learning new skills; fun;
and working collaboratively to achieve a big goal (Holley, Organisciak, Owens). Not incidentally, these
same characteristics show up in discussions of digital humanities research for undergraduates --
particularly in the production of real contributions to scholarship, which is sharply contrasted with the
traditional undergraduate assignment, the five-paragraph essay with an audience of one (Blackwell &
Martin, Cohen, Kolowich).According to Rebecca Frost Davis, crowdsourcing could be a “silver bullet” for integrating digital
humanities practices into the undergraduate classroom. By providing opportunities for collaborative
learning and authentic tasks that contribute to student engagement, crowdsourcing can help develop
transferable skills and a habit of engagement with the humanities. For institutions without a DH center,
crowdsourcing can provide opportunities to engage in innovative classroom technologies without taxing
institutional resources, and act as an enticement for faculty interested in using digital research methods
(Davis). This is one means by which composition instructors can answer Cynthia Selfe’s call to “expand
their own understanding of composing beyond conventional bounds of the alphabetic...or risk having
composition studies become increasingly irrelevant” (Selfe, p. 54).
The panel will discuss findings derived from assessment of the first 6 months of the assignment model.
Initial findings are that students generally had a positive response to the project and were vocal in both
their support for primary research and multimodal composition. Two examples of early assessment
feedback follow: In addition to written feedback from the students, the panel will present data from a rigorous
assessment of the assignment planned for the spring of 2014 regarding students’ perceptions of the
assignment's utility and their understanding of library resources. While the collaboration between the Libraries and Rhetoric is currently in its pilot semester, we have
already seen that students benefit from conducting inquiries related to primary source materials.
Students report feeling a connection to people living in previous centuries. They experience themselves
as researchers discovering similarities and differences between present-day rhetorical modes and the
modes of Pioneers arriving in the midwest. This intertwining of library resources and general education
may suggest possibilities for using multimodal composition and crowdsourced DH resources to
demonstrate the value of student research in primary source documents across the curriculum. Our
panel will discuss challenges and triumphs uncovered through our experience designing, implementing,
and assessing this innovative assignment model.
Jen Wolfe, a Digital Scholarship Librarian at the University of Iowa Libraries, will provide background on
the development of the DIY History crowdsourcing initiative, with a focus on its significance as a tool for
public engagement.Kelly McElroy is the Undergraduate Services Librarian at the University of Iowa Libraries. She will discuss
the role of bibliographic instruction in this project, focusing on the benefits of tying research skills to an
inquiry-based assignment. Her presentation will outline challenges in archival education for non-history
majors, and the opportunities afforded by digital collections and crowdsourcing projects.Matt Gilchrist is co-director of Iowa Digital Engagement and Learning (IDEAL) and a lecturer in the
Rhetoric Department. In the spring of 2014, he will be interim director of the University of Iowa Writing
Center. Matt will discuss the principles of assignment design that inform the approach supported by
IDEAL, and more specifically how IDEAL helped shape the assignment model in collaboration with the
Libraries. His presentation will include the outcomes of an assessment of IDEAL’s support for assignment
design.Tom Keegan is a lecturer in the Rhetoric Department, as well as the co-director of Iowa Digital
Engagement and Learning (IDEAL) and the Assistant Director of Curriculum Design for Business
Communication and Protocol in the Tippie College of Business. Tom will discuss the implementation of
the assignment model in his class and student responses to the project. His presentation will summarize
the findings of an assessment project examining the assignment’s significance in his and other
classrooms. Blackwell, C., Martin, T. (2009) “Technology, Collaboration, and Undergraduate Research.” DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly, 3(1), 2009Cohen, P. “Giving Literature Virtual Life.” The New York Times 12 Mar. 2011. Web. 1 Nov. 2013Davis, R. “Crowdsourcing, Undergraduates, and Digital Humanities Projects.” Liberal Education in a Networked World 3 Sept. 2012. Web. 1 Nov. 2013Holley, R. “Crowdsourcing: How and Why Should Libraries Do It?” D-Lib Magazine, 16 (2/4), Mar./Apr. 2010. Web. 1 Nov. 2013Kolowich, S. (2012) “Behind the Digital Curtain.” Inside Higher Ed 27 Jan. 2012. Web. 1 Nov. 2013Lunsford, A. (1996) “Writing Definitions,” in Delivering College Composition: the Fifth Canon. Ed.￼Kathleen Blake Yancey. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann/Boynton, 2006: 141-155Miller, V. “Hands-on Experience with Civil War History.” The Gazette [Cedar Rapids] 26 Nov 2011. Web.￼1 Nov 2013Organisciak, P. “Why Bother? Examining the Motivations of Users in Large-Scale Crowd-Powered Online Initiatives.” Diss. University of Alberta, 2010Owens, T. “The Crowd and the Library.” User Centered Digital History 20 May 2012. Web. 1 Nov. 2013Sheridan, D.M., Ridolfo, J., Michel, A.J. (2012). The Available Means of Persuasion: Mapping a Theory and Pedagogy of Multimodal Public Rhetoric. Anderson, SC, USA: Parlor Press.Selfe, C. (2004) Students who teach us: A case study in a new media text designer. In Writing New￼ Media: Theory and Applications for Expanding the Teaching of Composition. Ed. Ann Wyocki,￼Johndan Johnson-Eilola, Cynthia Selfe and Geoffrey Sirc. Logan: Utah State UP. Pgs 43-66.Shipka, J. (2011). Toward a Composition Made Whole. Pittsburgh, PA, USA: University of Pittsburgh￼Press.Van Horne, S., Murniati, C., Gaffney, J. D. H., & Jesse, M. (2012). Promoting active learning in technology-infused TILE classrooms at the University of Iowa. Journal of Learning Spaces, 1(2), June 10, 2012.Yancey, K.B. (ed.) (2006) Delivering College Composition: the Fifth Canon. Portsmouth, NH:￼Heinemann/Boynton, 2006: 141-155.