In August 2009, Mazu belief and customs were formally inscribed on UNESCO’s
Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity (2013)1. Worship
of Mazu has long been the folk belief with the largest numbers of believers and
temples in Taiwan. It is a deeply rooted faith for Taiwanese. The folk belief
has been developed from Taiwan’s immigrant society and maritime culture. Mazu
is a goddess transformed from an ordinary female who can protect people on the
sea from disasters. Worship of Mazu has spread to more than 20 countries around
the world, and has had a profound impact on the majority of the faithful. The
artist Chin-Hsin Lin has spent 20 years completing the giant 124 m woodcut
prints Celebrating the Mazu Festival.
It records the celebrations of the most important religious deity in Taiwan
with rich details. The prints, exhibited in many museums abroad, have received
international recognition. The Celebrating
  the Mazu Festival prints are not only artworks but also a part of Taiwan folk
culture. Because of the richness of the work, we believe the cultural spirit
and content can be expressed through multiple-sensory interactions in digital
media.Based on the longest woodcut print
          scroll in the world, Celebrating the Mazu
            Festival, one of the most important Taiwan folk cultural artwork, we
propose an interdisciplinary project Digitalizing
the Mazu Festival Celebration: The Study and Application of Value-Added
Creative Methods to Taiwan Folk Culture and Art. We use digital
methods to create it with value-added applications of digital media, such as animation,
web site, interactive installation, and mobile app. The goals of the project
are as follows:

This integrated project consists of
three sub-projects: (1) The Analysis and Design of Cultural and Creative
Content: content analysis and animation creation; (2) The Study and Development
of Interactive Display Technology: development of motion-sensing and mobile
technologies; and (3) The Application of the Innovative Display Model: design
and construction of the web exhibition and interactive installation. The first
sub-project uses the Mazu Festival Celebration theme and create varied artistic
forms with animated image technology to present Taiwan folk culture. In the second
sub-project, we study and develop motion-capture and related innovative
display technologies.



This paper focuses on the third
sub-project that applies multiple senses and interaction in digital media to
represent the cultural content. Integrating information graphics, navigational
design, and a dynamic visual style is the design approach. This sub-project consists
of three parts: (1) Web Exhibition Hall: To design the information architecture
and navigation system, to design and produce the Web Exhibition Hall with 67 prints on the exhibition web; (2) Web
  Creative Displays: To create Web Creative
Displays on selected web pages with interactive information graphics to create
deep understanding of the cultural content; (3) Interactive Installation: To
design and build the physical installation, and to integrate animated content, artistic
form, and motion-sensing technologies in the “Celebrating the Mazu Festival” Interactive Installation. The
process and results show the possibility of integration of folk art and digital
media.1. UNESCO. (2013). Mazu belief and customs. Retrieved January 20, 2013, from www.unesco.org/culture/ich/index.php?lg=en&pg=00011&RL=00227.