Introduction to Text Analysis and Topic Modeling with R is a sequence of two workshops that will provide a practical introduction to text analysis with a special emphasis on topic modeling. Taken together, the workshops will cover basic text processing, data ingestion, data preparation, and topic modeling. The main computing environment for the workshops will be R: "the open source programming language and software environment for statistical computing and graphics." While no programming experience is required, students must have basic computer skills, must be familiar with their computer's file system, and must be comfortable entering commands in a command line environment. Though the two workshops are designed to stand alone, the second one is more advanced and assumes some basic familiarity with topic modeling. Participants might want to visit The LDA Buffet is Now Open; or, Latent Dirichlet Allocation for English Majors for a general overview.While not required, participants are encouraged to work through at least the first two of the seven basic R lessons available at R Code School prior to taking this workshop.Important: It is critical that you arrive on time to every session and be ready to roll with RStudio installed and running. The workshop will begin on schedule, and if you miss the first few minutes of any session you'll be lost!Summary: In this workshop you will be introduced to the R programming language while learning the basics of computational text analysis. You will learn basic R syntax and be introduced to the RStudio programing environment. Text analysis topics covered will include text ingestion and tokenization, word frequency analysis, dispersion plots, and if time permits, correlation analysis.* Times are for illustration only.Summary: In this workshop, you will be introduced to topic modeling and learn how to analyze and visualize topic model output in R. For this work, we will use the R implementation of MALLET that was developed by David Mimno. Student will also learn how to parse TEI-based XML and how to segment large texts into chucks. We will discuss various text pre-processing procedures including how to do part of speech tagging in R using the openNLP package. Though this will be a hands-on workshop, some techniques explored here a quite advanced and those unfamiliar with such things as XML document structure and basic text analysis may find it better to observe and then use the included documentation to practice the techniques at home.* Times are for illustration only. 