Digital Humanities can act, and is acting, as an agent of digital cultural empowerment.
Critical awareness of method and tools in Digital Humanities can bridge the gaps between the range of
humanities corpora and the actual digital practices used to understand, analyse, and share them.
NeDiMAH is about bridging these gaps and work groups on Space and Time, and on Information
Visualisation, have successfully worked together across disciplines to consider these tools and methods
and to define critical design principles both for research itself and also for creating and using digital tools
for different aspects of the research process.
The workshop will focus on digital cultural empowerment ­ in particular looking at the ways in which
humanities participants are empowered through using visualisation outside traditional domains, and
harnessing the power of digital techologies to explore culture outside the confines of textual, linear
narrative and traditional publication. We will focus on visualisation as the representation of knowledge
in a multiplicity of new, engaging and challenging approaches across humanities disciplines.
Answers to research questions are being represented in innovative ways and we are interested in how
these differing approaches are applied across the humanities wthout losing the specificity of their
respective domains:

         - How do historians, linguists, geographers, and art historians use visualisation?
- How are archaeologists integrating innovative visual methodologies in their research and
publication?
          - How does visualising literature augment and sustain research practices?
- How can deep mapping increase our understanding of historical processes?
         Over the past two years, workgroups in NeDIMAH have carried out an extensive survey of digital
practitioners and their practices related to the use of visualisations and the representation of space and
time. This work through a formal survey and through targeted workshops has been extensively mined
and collated and the findings will be presented, shared, refined and form a guiding instrument for
practise in these fields. This guide is the starting point of this workshop and its results will be shared and
enriched by the participants.
         Objectives:
         -  To bring together researchers with specific interests in method development considering the
whole research process;-  To capture and share the experiences and progress of researchers developing or using visual
methods either as an end­result or as part of the research process in different disciplines;

		- To consider scholarly communication and to constantly redefine how we read visualisation and
for what purpose.
Based on the survey and past workshops, we gathered evidence and have come to understand how
different research questions can arise from these methods in terms of open data, collaboration,
remediation, space, performance, impact and outreach and to that end, we welcome participation from
researchers with innovative questions and methodologies to share in the workshop. This workshop will
appeal to those who are beginning to experiment with visualisation as well as those with a deeper
experience with visualisation, temporal, and spatial issues. Participants are expected to prepare themselves by considering the following questions:

						We propose to use 4 case studies as an inspiration/stimulation for sharing, discussing and summarizing
participants’ experiences:

						This is a truly inter and transdisciplinary approach delivered by an international team that will highlight the
variety of modes through which visualisation as a tool can facilitate exploration, knowledge creation, and
understanding for researchers.
This workshop will target researchers with specific interests in methods empowering digital culture
through using visualisation, particularly outside traditional domains. We will also be targeting invitations
and mining the NeDiMAH network’s contacts from participants in NeDIMAH workshops, specifically
time/space and infoviz workgroups, the DARIAH network and attempting to engage new participants who are attending DH through more broad invitation on mailing lists and discussion forums. We will also  use our contact with UCLA (Johanna Drucker at UCLA ) as well as the CESTA lab at Stanford (Nicole
Coleman, Zephyr Frank, Karl Krossner).
We will begin advertsing the availability of the workshop upon workshop acceptance and will make it
available until target is attained. If there is more demand than anticipated we will establish a waiting list
and can possibly deliver an additional workshop in the morning.
We anticipate 30 participants based on past workshop attendance at DH2012 using first come first serve
principle. Registration will be done via the DH2014 registration website.

    13.30 Session I (1 hours):
  Instructions for the work in break out group 
One document per group of 6 answering the questions. Aiming at 5 groups.
         
    14.30 -15.30 Breakout and discussions (1 hour)
   
    16.30-17.30 Session II 1h
   Reporting back from discussions
Conclusions and further stepsTurn into an ongoing interactive document?
         
    18.00-18.40 Joint walk to resturant
  
    Fredrik Palm

  email: fredrik.palm@humlab.umu.se
mobile: +46 70 3364438
Fredrik Palm is an expert in databases, GIS, visualization, web­development and have been working in
HUMlab since 2001. He has good management skills and been involved in writing several research
proposals in the EU frame programmes for Research and Development (FP6 and FP7).
Fredrik initiated the proposal of the QVIZ­project and was the assistant project manager of the FP 6 project
(2006­2008). Fredrik has an Informatics degree and a teaching degree in History, Geography, Religion and
Social sciences. Fredrik's role in HUMlab is to act a translator/broker between the needs of researchers and
the potential of information technology.
Furthermore he has been involved as development coordinator in the BIOMAP (2008­2010), SHiPS
(2009­2011) and the SEAD­project (2008­2013) and "Digital publication of Rock­Carvings at Nämforsen"
(2011­2013).
He is also involved in the DIABAS­project (2003,2010­2013) and the ERC­founded project "Mapping the
Jewish Sects of the Byzantine Empire" (2012­2013). He is also involved in the CITIZMAP­project founded by
Vinnova (2011­2013). Fredrik Palm is also leader of a working group 2 "Visualisation" in Network for Digital
Methods in the Arts and Humanities ­ NeDiMAH.(2011­2014)
shawn.day@ucc.ie+353 (0)83 0024264Shawn Day blends the aesthetic and informative as an entrepreneur, digital historian, economist. He
lectures at University College Cork, Queen's University Belfast and Trinity College Dublin, in Digital and
Medical Humanities and Social Computing.His personal research explores the social and economic circumstances of the nineteenth century retail
liquor trade and it's impact on family. He applies digital, spatial and social network analysis to the
relationships between credit, respectability, and order in the Victorian community. Recent articles have
examined the social dimensions of the Victorian public mental hospital using GIS and statistical modeling
tools. Shawn has been involved in a number of successful and innovative digital humanities projects.
These include large manuscript census databases in the 1871/1891 census project (University of
Guelph), the national TAPoR text analysis portal project, the Canadian Network for Economic History
(CNEH) and the Network for Canadian History and the Environment (NiCHE).
Shawn has blended his background in management economics with an entrepreneurial ethos to found a
number of successful software development ventures in Canada and applies this experience to academic
activities.
o.murphy@ucc.i+353 (0)21 4902591Orla Murphy is a lecturer in the School of English at University College Cork, in the Irish national,
inter-institutional Digital Arts and Humanities PhD program, and co coordinator of the MA in Digital Arts
and Humanities at UCC. She is interested in digital pedagogy and in working to create an online MA in
Digital Cultures, launching in September 2014. Her research is focused on intermediality, on how the
text is, was, and will be transmitted; how we read, represent, and share knowledge in new networked
and virtual environments. She is co chair with Fredrik Palm, HUMlab Sweden, of the information
visualisation working group in NeDiMAH.eu, (Network for Digital Methods in the Arts and Humanities)
and vice chair of the EU CoST (Cooperation in Science and Technology) CoSCH.info working group on
algorithms and representing 3D; she is also Irish representative on the CoST transdomain action on
Gender in Science and Technology.
nicolas.thely@univ-rennes2.fr+33 681 86 87 81Nicolas Thély is professor in Digital Humanities at Université de Rennes 2 (France). He teaches digital art
          and aesthetics. As an art critic and theorist he has published  Vu à la Webcam (Essai sur la Web-intimité),
          (2002),  Corps, Art Vidéo et Numérique (2005) and  Mes Favoris (2007). Between 2007 and 2011, he has
headed the Basse Définition research project design to show how algorithms such as PageRank, MP3,
MPEG, and GIF have restructured the sensorial environment and creative power of contemporary artists.
Since 2011, Nicolas Thély use digital tools and quantative methods to debate in aesthetics about Art
critiscism. Last October, He organised with Alexandre Serres and Olivier Le Deuff THATCamp Saint-Malo
(DH and design). He is professor referent for the digital humanities platform of the Maison des Sciences
de l'Homme en Bretagne (MSH-B).
His last publications : Search terms : Basse déf. (dir.), éditions B42 ; Le Tournant numérique de
l'esthétique, collection Art, pensée & Cie, Publie.net (2011) ; "Rôle et enjeux du design graphique",
THATCamp Paris 2012, Non-actes des non-conférences des humanités numériques, éditions de la
Maison des Sciences de l'Homme, Paris, 2012 ; "Archiver le Web", Read/Write Book n°2 (Introduction
aux humanités numériques), dir. Pierre Mounier, Open Edition Press, Paris, 2012. 