Annotation Studio is a collaborative online annotation tool
developed at Hyperstudio, Center for Digital Humanities at MIT, for teaching
and learning in the humanities. It is funded by the National Endowment for the
Humanities and is one of several annotation tools that incorporate The
Annotator from the Open Knowledge Foundation (annotatorjs.org), thereby
benefiting from and participating in the highly collaborative community around
that code library.This is a half-day (3-hour) workshop for educators, administrators,
librarians, developers and technologists interested in exploring what
Annotation Studio has to offer. The content and format has been refined based
on feedback from workshops delivered over several years. All participants will
come away with an understanding of the tool and what it can do.In addition, we aim to convey the adaptability of Annotation
Studio and to illustrate how individuals and institutions can adopt it,
integrate it into humanities teaching and learning, deploy it, extend it for
specific use cases, and how to contribute back to the growing community of
practitioners.We’ll open with a walkthrough of the tool and its
functionality, then quickly move to structured hands-on work, followed by
focused discussions and a final Q&A and networking opportunity. In the
hands-on session, all participants will take on the roles of readers, writers,
and instructors. Through this exchange of roles, all will gain a comprehensive
understanding of the functionality of the tool. Participants will then choose
one of two breakout sessions--one on pedagogy and theory or one on development
and deployment--to focus on their more particular areas of interest. In both sessions, we will introduce an online support forum we
are using to facilitate conversations across time and distance, and invite all
participants to join that conversation.
OverviewHands-on Break out sessionsDebriefThe target audiences for this workshop include: students,
instructors, developers, and administrators in the humanities, in both formal
and informal settings. In the past, this workshop has attracted between 30 and
40 participants from diverse fields and institutions. All participants should
bring a laptop equipped with Wi-Fi with the latest Google Chrome, Safari, or
Mozilla Firefox web browser installed prior to the workshop. The application
does not work offline and does not work in Internet Explorer.Annotation Studio is an easy-to-use platform for collaborative note
taking and commenting with a special focus on education. This workshop provides
an introduction to the application (30 minutes), and hands-on practice in
different roles (60 minutes). Two breakout sessions will address topics of
interest to specific audiences in more depth (60 minutes). The workshop wraps
up with 30 minutes of question/answer, feedback, and networking.Part 1: Intro, (30 minutes)Part 2: Hands-on (60 minutes)Part 3: Breakouts (60 minutes)Part 4: Debrief (30 minutes)
    Kurt Fendt, Executive
Director, MIT Hyperstudio
  Dr. Kurt Fendt is Principal Research Associate in Comparative
Media Studies and Executive Director of HyperStudio – Digital Humanities at
MIT. He teaches a range of upper-level German Studies courses in Foreign
Languages and Literatures. Fendt has held Visiting Professorships at the University
of Cologne, the Technical University of Aachen (both Germany), and the
University of Klagenfurt, Austria; in 2001 he was Visiting Scientist at the
Fraunhofer Institute in Sankt Augustin, Germany. He is co-Principal
Investigator of Annotation Studio, an NEH-funded web application for multimedia
annotation in humanities education. Since 2005, he has been organizing the MIT
European Short Film Festival. Before coming to MIT in 1993, Fendt was Assistant
Professor in the Department of Applied Linguistics at the University of Bern in
Switzerland, where he established the Media Learning Center for the Humanities
and earned his Ph.D. in modern German literature with a thesis on hypertext and
text theory in 1993 after having completed his MA at the Ludwig-Maximilians-University
in Munich, Germany.
    Jamie Folsom, Lead Web
Applications Developer, MIT Hyperstudio
  Jamie builds tools to support teaching and research in the
humanities. He participates in all aspects of the lab's work, from consulting
with faculty and collaborating with partners, to developing and deploying web
apps and services, to presenting the lab’s work and training people on the use
of its tools at conferences. He has extensive experience teaching with and
about technology, managing technology projects, and building web sites and
applications.He is particularly interested in the technical challenges
peculiar to Digital Humanities Centers: how to conceive, design and develop
tools highly tailored to specific research and instructional goals, while
remaining agile enough to serve a range of disciplines and fields.He holds an AB in French from Vassar College and a Master's
Degree in Technology in Education from Harvard University, and has been a
teacher, a technology trainer and manager, and a web applications developer for
20 years. He is from Boston, Massachusetts.
    Rachel Schnepper,
Communications Officer, MIT Hyperstudio
  As Communications Officer, Rachel brings over ten years of
higher education experience with her to HyperStudio. Prior to working at
HyperStudio, Rachel taught at Rutgers University, Princeton University, DePaul
University, and Washington and Lee University. Accordingly, Rachel is
intimately familiar with the needs of faculty and is committed to helping them
integrate digital humanities tools into their research and teaching.Rachel earned her PhD in early modern European history in 2010
from Rutgers University. The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the North American
Conference on British Studies have supported her research, which focuses on
media transformations in the seventeenth century English Atlantic.
    Liam Andrew, Research
Assistant, MIT Hyperstudio
  Liam Andrew graduated from Yale University in 2008, where he
studied the advent of sound recording and its influence on modern language,
literature and music. After stints as a book indexer, French-to-English
translator, archivist, and English teacher abroad, he dove into programming and
emerged as a software engineer for Delve, a newsreader and aggregator that
helps organizations find and share important reads. As a graduate student in
MIT’s Comparative Media Studies program, his research interests lie at the
intersection of sound and text on one hand, and classification and
recommendation systems on the other. He is also a sound designer for theater
and multi-instrumentalist in Dinowalrus.
    Kurt Fendt, Executive Director, MIT HyperStudio
  MIT HyperStudioMIT Room 16-63577 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139, USAphone: 617-253-4312skype: kendtemail: fendt@mit.edutwitter: @fendt
    Jamie Folsom, Lead Web Applications Developer
  MIT HyperStudioMIT Room 16-63577 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139, USAmobile: 617-669-0852skype: jamiefolsomemail: jfolsom@mit.edutwitter: @jamiefolsom
    Rachel Schnepper, Communications Officer
  MIT HyperStudioMIT Room 16-63577 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139, USAphone: 617-324-0102email: rschnepp@mit.edu
    Liam Andrew, Research Assistant
  MIT HyperStudioMIT Room 16-63577 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139, USAemail: landrew@mit.edu