The Workshop is the european „successor“ of the last-year „Sustainability Strategies“-
Workshop in Nebraska at DH2013 ran by Nancy Maron from Ithaka S+R
(http://dh2013.unl.edu/schedule-and-events/workshops/#sustainability). The
workshop@DH2014 offers a training in projects management and sustainability like the
Ithaka-Workshop, additionally combined with a Round Table joined by national and
international key players (Humanists, librarians, archivists, members of funding
organizations etc.) to discuss main problem areas and to find possible solutions. The
Project is supported by several key institutions in the Digital Humanities like the US-
Office for Digital Humanities (ODH) [Brett Bobley] or the King’s College in London
(Tobias Blanke).
Projects in the Digital Humanities are facing a lot of challenges concerning project
management and sustainability in contrast to „traditional“ academic researchs projects.
The limits between research, teaching and what one may call a lasting online service are
blurred; projects have to deal with the laws of the field of the fast moving, fluid and
competitive web-business. But because projects in the Digital Humanities are founded
by academics, they are shaped by a research-centered and a supply-side mentality,
which is neither aimed for sustainability nor user-oriented. Many of these projects —
let’s call them generally „Online Academic Resources “— state problems developing a
specific and adequate project management as well as a sustainable revenue model.
Project leaders are simply not trained for such an enterprise. Coupled with the fast pace
of the WWW and/or its technology a partial or complete absence of appropriate project
management is to be stated. Project leaders seem to be overtaxed and thus the projects
fail or cannot bail out their often huge potential. Furthermore, especially in switzerland,
there is lacking an openness to collaborate with qualified partners, e.g. librarians and
archivists who could bring in a lot of skills and experiences.
The Workshop aims at helping project leaders to improve project management, to
develop sustainable revenue models and to bring different people together to share
Knowledge and Know-How. Core goals of the Workshop are therefore: Offer a training
possibiliy for project leaders and other interested people, connecting people and sharing
Know-How, create an awareness of the relevance of the topic with key partners in
Switzerland – because here, unfortunately, currently there is no organization yet that
specifically supports Digital Humanities projects – in contrast to the EU and U.S. space.
Of particular relevancy would be the participation of libraries and archives, since they
are playing an increasingly more important role in the world of Digital Humanities.
The Workshop will be divided into two parts of approximately two hours each:
1) A training tutorial in project management and sustainability ran by Stefan Andreas
Keller with a maximum of 20 participants (recommended maximum number of
participtants is based on the experiences of the Ithaka-Tutorial). Participants of this
tutorial should be those with interest in and/or responsibility for charting a course for
the development of a digital scholarly project or resource. This could include:

					Those in early stages of considering sustainability strategies for their projects are
encouraged to attend.Some participants like important project leaders (especially from Switzerland) will be
invited prior to the Workshop, but it is intended to left some places open for participants
of the DH-Conference to join - also spontaneously - the workshop on site.
2) A Round Table with invited national and international key partners to present
strategies and discuss solutions on the topic. Experts from different countries (DARIAH,
ODH, Ithaka S+R) will give small inputs concerning the specific situation in their
countries and about infrastructures where project leaders can get support and funding.
In addition, there should be an open discussion on different relevant topics between
project leaders, DH-institutions and potential sponsors. Several relevant topics could be
discussed and fixed in advance or directly on-site. Number of participants will be at
about 20.Some of the central questions of the workshop are:

					Concerning the legal and organizational level:
