With the PressForward plugin, the power to publish a curated site that highlights work from
the open web is available to everyone. A WordPress plugin that enables users to aggregate
and transform web feeds into a site that republishes blog posts, news, and reports, the
PressForward plugin streamlines the process of creating web publications. PressForward
publications build communities, direct attention to often-overlooked work, and stimulate
discussion of ideas, methods, and news. In this half-day workshop, participants will learn to
use the PressForward plugin to create their own publications, track workflow through
aggregation, review, and nomination, and to publish content from select RSS feeds.
Developed by the PressForward Project at the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New
          Media, the PressFoward plugin is the heart of the RRCHNM publication Digital Humanities Now. In addition, the publications Global Perspectives on Digital Humanities, Dh+Lib and the forthcoming Environmental Humanities Now all use the plugin to maintain a community-driven
website that offers readers and participants an opportunity to engage in relevant
conversations about their field on the open web. The plugin was developed with an eye
toward eventual dissemination and replication, and the timing of DH2014 corresponds with
the public release of the plugin and the availability of its documentation.
To get the full benefit of the workshop, participants should bring a laptop, create a
WordPress site (directions will be provided prior to arrival), and collect five to ten RSS feeds
to begin populating their site. Groups intending to collaborate on a community-driven
publication are particularly welcome, and discussion of how to structure and organize a
community publication will be included in the schedule.
8:30 – 9:00: Introduction of class and participants
          9:00 – 9:30: Discussion of how the plugin functions for Digital Humanities Now
          9:30 – 9:45: Break
          9:45 – 10:30: Installing the plugin and adding feeds
          10:30 – 11:15: Using the plugin to publish/getting your site up and running
11:15 – 12:00: Discussion of work flow for a group publication and other uses of the plugin.
This workshop is open to up to 20 participants of all skill levels with an interest in
developing websites that include a component of aggregating and curating work found on
the open web. This could include a community of DHers who want to create a publication
like Digital Humanities Now to highlight the work they believe deserves wider dissemination.
Users could also include grad students using the plugin to highlight work on a single topic of
interest, a scholar who would like to compile the work they themselves have done elsewhere
onto a single site, or professors who may find the plugin a convenient way to highlight work
for their students to read on a course site. Given the flexibility of the plugin, the target
audience is diverse. There is no need for an advanced call for papers. Stephanie Westcott
Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media
George Mason University, MSN 1E7
Fairfax, VA 22030
703-993-9277
westcott.chnm@gmail.com
         Stephanie Westcott is Research Assistant Professor at the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History
and New Media at George Mason University. As a member of the PressForward team, she is
Managing Editor of Digital Humanities Now and Journal of Digital Humanities and researches
scholarly communication on the open web. A cultural historian with expertise in the history of
gender and sexuality in the twentieth-century United States, she received her PhD from the
University of Wisconsin-Madison in 2012.
         Joan Fragaszy Troyano
Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media
George Mason University, MSN 1E7
Fairfax, VA 22030
703-993-9277
joanftroyanophd@gmail.com
         Joan Fragaszy Tryoano is a Research Assistant Professor and Director of the PressForward
project at the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media at George Mason University.
With PressForward she is researching the sourcing, evaluating, publishing, and crediting of
scholarly communication from the open web. She also edits two experimental publications —
Digital Humanities Now and the Journal of Digital Humanities — and oversees the
development of the PressForward plugin to facilitate the aggregation, curation, and
dissemination of scholarship. Joan also is a practicing and teaching public historian with
experience working on the September 11 Digital Archive and Echo projects at RRCHNM, as
well as museum exhibition research and education at the Smithsonian National Museum of
American History and National Portrait Gallery. At Indiana University she studied music
performance and earned a BA in History and Latin. Her PhD is in American Studies from
George Washington University, where she researched immigration history, visual culture, and
public understandings of the past. 