The web­based system CATMA (Computer Aided Text Markup and Analysis) was designed to
address the interest essentially motivating human encounters with literature: hermeneutic, i.e.,
“meaning” oriented high­order interpretation. In the scholarly interpretation of literature we are not
looking for the right answer, but for new, plausible and relevant answers. This requires a true
hermeneutic markup as defined by Pietz (2010: paragraph 1):
By "hermeneutic" markup I mean markup that is deliberately interpretive. It is not
limited to describing aspects or features of a text that can be formally defined and
objectively verified. Instead, it is devoted to recording a scholar's or analyst's
observations and conjectures in an open­ended way. As markup, it is capable of
automated and semi­automated processing, so that it can be processed at scale
and transformed into different representations. By means of a markup regimen
perhaps peculiar to itself, a text will be exposed to further processing such as text
analysis, visualization or rendition. Texts subjected to consistent interpretive
methodologies, or different interpretive methodologies applied to the same text,
can be compared. Rather than being devoted primarily to supporting data
interchange and reuse – although these benefits would not be excluded –
hermeneutic markup is focused on the presentation and explication of the
interpretation it expresses.CATMA has been developed to support McGann’s (2004) open­ended, discontinuous, and

non­hierarchical model of text­processing. Its non­deterministic approach to markup allows the
user to express many different readings directly in markup. The system not only enables
collaborative research but it is based on an approach to markup that transcends the limitations
of low­level text description, too. CATMA supports high­level semantic annotation through
TEI­compliant, non­deterministic stand­off markup and acknowledges the standard practice in
literary studies, i.e., a constant revision of interpretation (including one’s own) that does not
necessarily amount to falsification. Moreover, it enables users to switch ad hoc between text
annotation and text analysis in either direction as well as recursively.
In 2013 in a joint project, heureCLÉA , two research teams (one computer scientists, the second
narratologists) started to focus on an exemplary hermeneutic "use case": the decoding of
temporal information in narratives, namely the automatic detection of temporal phenomena in
literary narratives.
For this purpose, we developed an approach based on both manual annotation of narratological
phenomena andtherule­basedextractionandnormalizationoftemporalexpressionswhichare
used as a starting point for machine learning. This project is still ongoing, but the automated
annotation of temporal expressions and other linguistic features like POS (part­of­speech)
tagging and sentence detection, as well as tense annotations based on morphological analysis,
have already been implemented in CATMA and can be used for a combined automatic and
manual annotation of texts.
In our tutorial, we will introduce the core annotation and analysis functionalities of CATMA and
show how they can be combined with the annotations provided automatically by HeidelTime and
other components. Participants will have the opportunity of testing the tool in a hands­on session
where they can annotate their own texts or annotate collaboratively a text we will provide. We
would like to engage participants in a design critique of CATMA and its components and a
general discussion about requirements for text analysis tools in their fields of interest, too.
All tutorial instructors come from the developing team of the heureCLÉA project. We have been
presenting and teaching CATMA, HeidelTime and heureCLÉA on various national and
international occasions in the last years. Two of us have included crucial aspects from
heureCLÉA in their PhD research projects, too.
Thomas Bögel, Institute of Computer Science, Heidelberg University
Thomas studied computational linguistics and is currently working as a researcher and pursuing
his PhD at the Institute of Computer Science at Heidelberg University. His research focuses on
event extraction and timeline generation, as well as the development of machine learning­based
systems for temporal relation extraction from narrative texts.
Evelyn Gius, Department of Languages, Literature and Media, Faculty of the Humanities,
University of Hamburg
Evelyn has been trained as a computational linguist and is now working in the field of literary
computing as a researcher and lecturer. For her PhD project she has explored with CATMA the
benefits of applying narratological categories from literary studies to the analysis of narrations of
real­life labor conflicts.
Marco Petris, Department of Languages, Literature and Media, Faculty of the Humanities,
University of Hamburg
Marco is a computer scientist with a strong affinity for the humanities and has been engaged in
the creation of CATMA from the very beginning. As a research developer he is involved in all
aspects of the design and implementation of tools for the Digital Humanities.
Jannik Strötgen. Institute of Computer Science, Heidelberg University
Jannik studied computational linguistics and economics at Heidelberg University before he joined
the Institute of Computer Science as researcher and PhD student. His research focuses on
temporal and geographic information extraction and retrieval, and he is the main developer of the
widely­used, multilingual, cross­domain temporal tagger HeidelTime, which achieved the best
results for the task of temporal tagging at TempEval­2010 (English) and TempEval­2013

    Contact address
  Evelyn Gius
Universität Hamburg
Department of Languages, Literature and Media
Institut für Germanistik
Von­Melle­Park 6
20146 Hamburg
Tel + 49 40 42838 6942
Fax + 49 40 42838 3553
evelyn.gius@uni­hamburg.de
The primary users of CATMA are literary scholars, and graduate and undergraduate students of
Literary Studies. Nevertheless, this tutorial is likely to be of interest also to:
Expected number of participants: We can accommodate up to 25 participants.
Participants will be asked to bring their own laptops. We will need internet access for all
participants and a screen projector.
The tutorial is designed as a 3,5 hours tutorial, including a break of approx. 30 minutes.
Provisional format:
www.catma.de (last seen 2014­02­17)Piez, Wendell (2010), Towards Hermeneutic Markup: An architectural outline, King's College, DH 2010,
London. Available from:
http://dh2010.cch.kcl.ac.uk/academic­programme/abstracts/papers/html/ab­743.html (last seen
2014­02­17). We define this distinction as follows: description cannot tolerate ambiguity, whereas an interpretation is an
interpretation if and only if at least one alternative to it exists. Note that alternative interpretations are not
subject to formal restrictions of binary logic: they can affirm, complement or contradict one another. In short,
interpretations are of a probabilistic nature and highly context dependent.
heureCLÉA is a BMBF­funded eHumanities project run jointly by the University of Hamburg and Heidelberg
University since the beginning of 2013 (cf. www.heureclea.de, last seen 2014­02­17).
cf. the accepted paper by Janina Jacke and Jan Christoph Meister: Pushing Back the Boundary of
Interpretation: Concept, Practice and Relevance of a Digital Heuristic 