 Panel: The Interface of the Collection

					Rockwell, Geoffrey, 
					University of Alberta, 
					
geoffrey.rockwell@ualberta.ca

				

					Ruecker, Stan, 
					University of Alberta, 
					
sruecker@ualberta.ca

				

					Ilovan, Mihaela, 
					University of Alberta, 
					
ilovan@ualberta.ca

				

					Sondheim, Daniel, 
					University of Alberta, 
					
sondheim@ualberta.ca

				

					Radzikowska, Milena, 
					Mount Royal University, 
					
mradzikowska@gmail.com

				

					Organisciak, Peter, 
					University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
					
organis2@illinois.edu

				

					Brown, Susan, 
					University of Guelph, 
					
sbrown@uoguelph.ca

				
Introduction

						Rockwell, Geoffrey, 
						University of Alberta, 
						
geoffrey.rockwell@ualberta.ca

					

						Ruecker, Stan, 
						University of Alberta, 
						
sruecker@ualberta.ca

					

						Ilovan, Mihaela, 
						University of Alberta, 
						
ilovan@ualberta.ca

					
“just as interface cannot – finally – be decoupled from functionality,
						neither can aesthetics be decoupled from interface.” (Kirschenbaum 2004,
						IV.34) 


					
What is the interface to a collection? How has the interface to scholarly
						collections or corpora changed from print to the web? What interfaces are
						possible? As the scale of information that we have access to grows
						exponentially we are increasingly dealing with collections of documents
						rather than documents as individuals. These collections, whether they are
						craft collections of TEI documents like the Globalization Compendium (
         (
link
)
   ) or industrial collections like
						Google Books (
         (
link
)
   ), are the way we see
						through to human artifacts and the way we manage them. Collections and the
						ways they are put together impose interfaces on the individual artifacts in
						order to collect them. For this reason we are organizing a panel that pays
						attention to the collected interface and its evolution. While the interface
						to the collection would seem unimportant compared to the interface for
						reading the artifact itself, in this epoch of digital excess we believe that
						it is the corpus interface that is the way into the excess and it is the
						corpus interface that structures the readers perceptions of the scope and
						purposes of any collection. 

					
The apparently obvious distinction between data and interface is troubled in
						various ways, most often from the user perspective, where details of the
						underlying architecture are not visible, so that the interface becomes, for
						all practical purposes, the data. From the perspective of the developer, on
						the other hand, the issue is one of layers of interface, not necessarily in
						the graphical user sense, but rather between different forms of
						representation of the data and code. For certain kinds of information
						graphics, theorists like Ben Schneiderman point out that one particularly
						effective design strategy involves “direct manipulation”, where the data is
						treated by the user as a kind of interactive widget (Shneiderman, Williamson
						& Ahlberg 1992). In this case, as in our final presentation in this
						panel, the question becomes one of how many layers of interface/data can be
						usefully superimposed to create not just a communicative environment, but
						also one where arguments can be formulated and considered. 


					
In this panel, members of the Interface Design team of the Implementing New
						Knowledge Environments (INKE) project will discuss the manner in which
						collection interfaces are influenced by the structure of the materials
						included, by the history of traditions for representing collections, and by
						the intended use/needs of the users. We will review both print and digital
						interfaces in an effort to understand the way in which interacting with
						textual and non-textual content has changed and evolved. 


					
As Clay Shirky points out, the problem of information overload makes us feel
						good as it explains why we aren’t getting anything done. It is also a
						standard starter for explaining the need for new information technologies.
						In Plato’s Phaedrus Socrates tells the story of the
						invention of writing (274c – 275b) which is developed ostensibly to help our
						memories and therefore make us wiser. Vannevar Bush in “As We May Think”
						likewise uses the problem of overload to introduce his ideas about new
						technologies like the hypertext workstation the Memex (1945, p.102). Clay
						Shirky, after acknowledging how overused this trope of overload is by
						technology writers, goes on to use it again to argue that the problem is
						actually “filter failure” (2008). In this panel we too are reusing this
						trope of overload and overabundance to practice what Matthew Kirschenbaum
						calls for in “’So the Colors Cover the Wires’: Interface, Aesthetics, and
						Usability.” Kirschenbaum argues that computers are “venues for representation” (emphasis in the
						original) and therefore we need to study the aesthetics of their interfaces,
						though the aesthetics can’t be detached from functionality (2004, IV.34) 


					
This panel will, in sum, start with a general introduction of the problem,
						then look at the collected interface through five short interventions that
						either reflect back on the evolution of interface or look forward showing
						experimental interfaces as to what could be. 


				
			
			
References:

				 
			
		
The Citation from Print to the Web

						Sondheim, Daniel, 
						University of Alberta, 
						
sondheim@ualberta.ca

					
What holds the collection together? One of the most important interface
						features for scholars is the lowly citation. The citation, whether in print
						or hypertextually instantiated on the web, is one of the interface features
						that weaves together citations through associations. In this panel
						presentation, we will survey the design of the citation as it has evolved
						from print to the web by presenting a draft topology of five citation design
						patterns: 

					
Absence of citation is a (non)pattern of missing
						citation that reminds us of the historical construction of citation and its
						importance to scholarship. We will compare instances of missing references
						in print to their online equivalents that suggest a collaborative future for
						citation. Perhaps all we need to connect to a reference is a search string
						for Google. 

					
Juxtaposition is a pattern of citation design where the
						citation is placed in the flow of the text, as in inline citation. The
						connective value of the citation comes from what it is juxtaposed with on
						the page. We will expand on inline citation to look at other spatial
						arrangements of information, both on the page and the screen. 

					
The Canonical citation is a pattern that points to an
						ontologically general idea of a work. We will show how canonical citation
						has been instantiated online such that the user can interact with multiple
						editions of the referenced. 

					
The Footnote is a pattern of citation design that
						creates a relationship between source text and cited text in a visual space.
						The citation is moved to the foot, but it can be moved aside in other ways
						especially online. 

					
The citation of Other Media is a pattern in which the
						object of citation is of a different type than the citation itself. We are
						seeing citations within digital video and computer games. How are we to
						understand the adaptation of citation expectations to other media? 

					
To conclude, we will show that current interfaces for navigating collections
						bear similarities to particular forms of citation, but that navigation is
						beginning to evolve beyond its print patterns. 

				
			
			
References:

				 
			
		
The Paper Drill

						Ruecker, Stan, 
						University of Alberta, 
						
sruecker@ualberta.ca

					
In this panel presentation, we consider the question of how the principles of
						rich- prospect browsing can be used to extend the design of a
						database-reporting tool for journals in the humanities. While the previous
						presentation surveys existing interfaces, this one presents a new
						experimental interface, The Paper Drill, designed to navigate collections of
						articles through citations. 

					

						

							
Figure 1: Paper Drill prototype

							
Full Size Image 

						
						

							
Figure 2: Paper Drill prototype

							
Full Size Image 

						
					
					
In the first year of INKE, we began to explore the possible affordances of a
						tool to support scholars in following citation trails through collections of
						academic articles (Ruecker et al. 2009). Our approach was to prototype a
						tool called The Paper Drill, where the user could choose a seed article,
						then obtain a report about the most frequently cited authors or articles. In
						year two, we are continuing development of the Paper Drill, but have added
						the concept of showcase browsing, where the home page of the tool provides
						heatmaps of the most frequently cited articles, arranged according to date
						range and journal category. The purpose of this overview is to add
						information that is not otherwise available in the display until after a
						report has been generated. We have also been experimenting with data
						sources, since the system becomes more effective (and the showcase
						visualization a more complex challenge) as the metadata in humanities
						journals improves. We will demonstrate The Paper Drill working on a journal
						article collection. 

				
			
			
References:

				 
			
		
Diachronic View on Digital Collections Interfaces

						Ilovan, Mihaela, 
						University of Alberta, 
						
ilovan@ualberta.ca

					
This presentation looks at the interface design of three successful and
						important digital collections: Project Gutenberg
						(http://www.gutenberg.org/), Perseus Digital Library
						(http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/) and the Victorian Web
						(http://www.victorianweb.org/index.html). Each of these projects has existed
						for over 10 years and gone through multiple interface designs, sometimes
						across technologies, which makes them ideal subjects for a diachronic
						analysis of the evolution of interfaces to digital collections. Studying
						interface evolution over time helps us understand: 

					
						
The relationship between the nature of the functionalities provided
							and interface design; 

						
The perceived or real differences between different types of projects
							from open source projects like Project Gutenberg to scholarly editorial
							projects like the Rossetti Archive; 

						
The pace of adopting and integrating new technologies and design
							perspectives; and 

						
The amount and nature of the influence exerted by user-demands over
							design-decisions. 

					
					
The methodology of the study includes, but is not limited to, a review of the
						existing literature about the history, architecture and design of the three
						collections, an environmental scan of all available versions of interfaces
						employed, and, where possible, interviews with people involved in the
						projects.


					
We will conclude our presentation by acknowledging the role played by
						interface design in the success of these collections and by assessing the
						value of the diachronic approach adopted in our study for interface
						analyses. 

				
			
			
References:

				 
			
		
The Corpus from Print to the Web

						Rockwell, Geoffrey, 
						University of Alberta, 
						
geoffrey.rockwell@ualberta.ca

					
In this presentation, we will examine the design and evolution of corpus
						interfaces by comparing features from two epochs of information design, the
						epoch of print and that of the web. In order to survey this variety of
						design we will present a draft topology of corpus design patterns. Patterns
						that we have identified include legal, religious, literary and
						archaeological corpora. 

					
Notable print corpora include the 6th century Corpus Juris
							Civilis, a collection of Roman laws that had as a notable effect
						the disappearance of the original writings on which it is based. In effect
						the collection replaces the individuals from history. Another significant
						example is The Royal Imperial Coinage, a print
						catalogue of Roman coins equipped with a variety of complex and innovative
						search and access interfaces. 

					
We will then show the creative ways in which corpus interfaces have been
						adapted to the online environment, along with the attendant novel methods of
						access and navigation that are then offered. For instance, the Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, begun in print in
						1853 and now being maintained and developed on the web, illustrates the
						effects of web remediation on searching and layout for traditional corpora.
						The Pyramid Texts Online recreates the original
						physical structure of the corpus, offering an inventive map-based
						navigational interface leading to translations and photographs of original
						texts. 

					
To conclude, this paper will reflect back on the development of the corpus
						from print to web, and will show how interface features within particular
						patterns have matured in the move to the web. 

				
			
			
References:

				 
			
		
Structured Surfaces for JiTR

						Radzikowska, Milena, 
						Mount Royal University, 
						
mradzikowska@gmail.com

					

						Ruecker, Stan, 
						University of Alberta, 
						
sruecker@ualberta.ca

					

						Brown, Susan, 
						University of Guelph, 
						
sbrown@uoguelph.ca

					

						Organisciak, Peter, 
						University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
						
organis2@illinois.edu,

					
In this last presentation, we describe the usefulness of a structured surface
						in the design of human-computer interfaces to collections, and propose as an
						experimental design idea user-generated structured surfaces that can be
						controlled in an interactive manner. These surfaces are interfaces that
						structure items in a collection in different ways. A structured surface is a
						cognitive interface artifact that provides a layer of meaning that supports
						the data imposed upon it. 

					

						

							
Figure 3: Nightingale’s Rose Interface

							
Full Size Image 

						
					
					
We experimented with a mashup of content provided by JiTR (Rockwell et al.
						2009, Rockwell 2008) and a structured surface inspired by Florence
						Nightingale’s rose diagram. The surface is composed of wedges representing
						months and a series of segments representing cause of death. That’s where
						the original information graphic ends, but we propose adding an additional
						layer of information. In this case, dots representing medicine shipments.
						Alternatively, the dots could represent the individual deaths of soldiers
						from Shropshire or number of ambulances with flat tires. In the context of
						JiTR, depending on your metadata, the wedges might represent genre, the
						segments authorship, and the dots are individual people who were at last
						year’s DH conference. We should mention that the structured surface could be
						one of a number of preexisting visualizations. Our intention is to
						experiment with Stanford’s excellent collection at Protovis.com (Heer et al.
						2010). We feel that the third layer of information represented by the dots
						or pins provides an exciting opportunity for people assembling dynamic
						collections to feed into the text analysis tools available through JiTR.
					

				
			

			
References:

				
					
						
Bush, V 
							1945
							 “As We May Think, ” 
							Atlantic Monthly, 
							176
							101-08
							July 1945


						
Heer, J
							Bostock, M
							Ogievetsky, V
							2010 “A Tour through the Visualization
								Zoo, ” Queue, 
							8
							5
							pp.20-30


						
Kirschenbaum, M
							2004
							 “So the Colors Cover the Wires: Interface, Aesthetics,
								and Usability, ” 
							Schreibman, S  R. SiemensJ Unsworth
							A Companion to Digital Humanities, 
							Oxford
							Blackwell
							2004
							1 November, 2010
							
         (
link
)
   
						


						

							Hamilton, E
							Cairns, H
							1961
							The Collected Dialogues of Plato including the
								Letters, 
							Princeton
							Princeton University Press
						


						
Rockwell, G
							Stan R
							Organisciak, P
							Sinclair, S
							2009
							 “Ubiquitous text analysis, ” 
								Digital Humanities 2009 conference, 
							University of Maryland


						
Rockwell, G
							2008
							 “Just In Time Research (JiTR): Supporting Experimental
								Text Analysis., ”  Paper presented at CaSTA
								2008, New Directions in Text Analysis,  conference. University
							of Saskatchewan Saskatchewan
						


						

							Ruecker, S
							Rockwell, S
							Radzikowska, M
							Sinclair, S
							Vandendorpe, C
							Siemens, R
							Dobson, T
							Doll, L
							Bieber, M
							Eberle-Sinatra, M
							Lucky, S
							The INKE Group 
							2009
							 “Drilling for Papers in INKE, ” 
							Proceedings of the INKE 2009: Research Foundations for
								Understanding Books and Reading in the Digital Age, 
						


						
Shneiderman, B
							Williamson, C
							Ahlberg, C
							1992 “Dynamic queries, ” 
							Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors
								in computing systems - CHI '92, the SIGCHI conference, 
							Monterey, California
							669-670
							
         (
link
)
   


						
Shirky, C
							2008
							 “It's Not Information Overload. It's Filter
								Failure, ” Web 2.0 Expo NY, 
							viewed 1 November 2010 
         (
link
)
   
						

					

				
			
		