Paper: Medical Case Studies on Renaissance Melancholy: Online Publication
                    Project

                    Suciu, Radu, 
                    
                        Université Paris-Diderot
                        France
                    , 
                    
risuciu@gmail.com

                
This paper presents the intermediary results of our ongoing research project at
                    the Université Paris-Diderot as part of a post-doctoral bursary awarded by the
                    Mayor of Paris’s 
 Research in Paris 2010
 program. The project aims at
                    combining traditional research methods (research, annotation and publication of
                    early modern texts and documents) with open source tools and standards (Omeka,
                    Zotero, TEI), with the goal of publishing an online encyclopedia of case studies
                    on medicine and melancholy in the late Renaissance. 

            
            
                
Historical Background

                
The principal research question asked is: how did the Renaissance physician
                    position himself in relation to his patient, and how does he attempt to document
                    his ‘clinical’ experiences in writing? The case histories of those suffering
                    from melancholy are instrumental in understanding this issue: tormented by
                    various hallucinations and deliria, the melancholy see what is not there and
                    live in a world of strange delusion, variously believing that they have no head,
                    or are made of brick, or of butter, and so forth. The patient who famously
                    believed his body to have been transformed into butter feared even approaching
                    the oven (an awkward situation since his line of work was in baking bread),
                    while yet another was convinced he was missing one leg, bitten off by an
                    imaginary crocodile. Cases such as these are at the heart of our research: we
                    have examined not only early modern medical documents, but also many important
                    collections of commonplace books in our search for case studies, patient
                    descriptions, medical observations, and so-called ‘curative epistles’.

            
            
                
Online Publication of the Research Materials

                
Rather than a traditional publication in print, the results are being
                    progressively published online with the aid of a number of open source tools.
                    The principal aims of this paper are to present the various preparatory research
                    stages, the choices made in implementing the digital methods and tools, and
                    finally to reflect on the evolution of the project in the years to come.

            
            
                
Methods and Tools: TEI Transcription, Omeka, Zotero Integration

                
This project uses the TEI recommendations for the transcription and the encoding
                    of early modern medical texts. The TEI has been demonstrated to be the most
                    comprehensive way of transcribing rich, complex texts by a number of major
                    projects See for example the ongoing Transcribe Bentham: A Participatory
                        Initiative. Available at: 

                            http://www.transcribe-bentham.da.ulcc.ac.uk/td/Transcribe_Bentham 

                        [Accessed October 4, 2010].. TEI documents are then stored in an
                    online database that uses and adapts the open source CMS Omeka Omeka is a
                        project of the Center for History and New Media, George Mason University.
                        Available at: 
 http://omeka.org/about/ 
 [Accessed March 10,
                        2011]., now a standard tool for the creation of online repositories
                    of documents and virtual exhibitions. We shall present the way in which we have
                    used and adapted Omeka’s plugins and themes. We shall also discuss the metadata
                    structuring choices we have made. Since this is handled directly by Omeka, it
                    facilitates the creation of an OAI repository, which can be made directly
                    accessible to data-harvesters See the forthcoming ‘Isidore’ developed by
                        the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS): ISIDORE -
                        Accès aux données et services numériques de SHS. Available at: 
http://www.rechercheisidore.fr/
 [Accessed March
                        10, 2011]. and eases integration with research management
                    applications such as Zotero.

            
            
                
Conclusion: Putting the University Database on Virtual Exhibition

                
The textual documents transcribed and added via the Omeka database are to be
                    accompanied by critical annotations, literary transpositions or references and
                    by a collection of images or an index of commonplaces. The website, unlike a
                    scholarly publication, will be more easily accessible and reach a wider
                    audience, while the database, making use of Web 2.0 technologies, will function
                    as a virtual exhibition, an online ‘cabinet of curiosities’, allowing readers to
                    interact with, comment on and contribute to the published materials. With this
                    in mind, the ultimate aim of this digital humanities project is to generate a
                    broader interest in early modern research and history by focusing on melancholy,
                    a subject that has never ceased to influence and inform disciplines from
                    medicine to literature.

            

        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Blair, Ann
                        2010
                        Too Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information before the
                            Modern Age, 
                        Yale University Press
                        New Haven
                    

                    

                        Bugei, Nyaosi
                        2010
                         “Voltaire’s Correspondences. Utilizing Visualization in the
                            Mapping the Republic of Letters Project, ” 
                        Spatial History Lab, 
                        September 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Burnard, Lou
                        Sperberg-McQueen, M.
                        2006
                        TEI Lite: Encoding for Interchange: an introduction to the
                            TEI, 
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Cohen, Daniel
                        Rosenzweig, Roy
                        2005
                        Digital History: A Guide to Gathering, Preserving, and
                            Presenting the Past on the Web, 
                        University of Pennsylvania Press
                        Philadelphia
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Dacos, Marin
                        2010
                        Read-write book: le livre inscriptible, 
                        Cléo
                        Marseille
                    

                    

                        Dandrey, Patrick
                        2005
                         Anthologie de l’humeur noire. Écrits sur la mélancolie
                            d'Hippocrate à l'Encyclopédie , 
                         Le Promeneur
                        Paris
                    

                    

                        Ferrand, Jacques
                        1990
                        A Treatise on Lovesickness (1623), 
                         Beecher, Donald A.
                        Ciavolella, Massimo
                        Syracuse University Press
                        Syracuse
                    

                    

                        Findlen, Paula
                        1994
                        Possessing Nature: Museums, Collecting, and Scientific
                            Culture in Early Modern Italy, 
                        University of California Press
                        Berkeley
                    

                    

                        Grafton, Anthony
                        2008
                        Codex in Crisis, 
                        Crumpled Press
                        New York
                    

                    

                        Kucsma, Jason
                        Reiss, Kevin
                        Sidman, Angela 
                         “Using Omeka to Build Digital Collections: The METRO Case
                            Study, ” 
                        D-Lib Magazine, 
                        2010
                        16
                        3/4
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Schreibman, Susan
                        Siemens, Ray
                        Unsworth, John
                        2004
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities, 
                        Blackwell
                        Oxford
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        March 10, 2011
                    

                
            
        