Poster: UCLDH: Big Tent Digital Humanities in Practice

					Warwick, Claire, 
					King's College London, United Kingdom, 
					
c.warwick@ucl.ac.uk

				

					Mahony, Simon, 
					UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom, 
					
s.mahony@ucl.ac.uk

				

					Nyhan, Julianne, 
					UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom, 
					
j.nyhan@ucl.ac.uk

				

					Ross, Claire, 
					UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom, 
					
claire.ross@ucl.ac.uk

				

					Terras, Melissa, 
					UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom, 
					
m.terras@ucl.ac.uk

				

					Tiedau, Ulrich, 
					UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom, 
					
u.tiedau@ucl.ac.uk

				

					Welsh, Anne, 
					UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom, 
					
a.welsh@ucl.ac.uk

				

				
There has been a great deal of concern recently about questions of how we should
					define Digital Humanities. John Unsworth (2010) in his plenary lecture at DHSI
					asked how we might define the boundaries of our discipline. UCL’s own Melissa
					Terras, (2010) in her widely reported plenary at DH2010, warned us that we must
					not only understand our discipline ourselves, but be able to communicate it
					succinctly to others. Others, including one of the authors of this proposal,
					tend to the view of ‘more hack less yack’. (Meloni, 2010) Yet questions remain,
					and the theme of DH2011 clearly prompts us toward such considerations. As a
					result we present a proposal below for a poster about the establishment of the
					new UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, (UCLDH) (
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh/
) one of whose founding principles is that of
					inclusivity, interdisciplinary and the broadest sense of definition, in which we
					demonstrate ways in which the big tent attitude to digital humanities is put
					into practice. Our tent includes not only other disciplines within academia, but
					also libraries, museums, archives, cultural heritage practice and commercial
					information providers. In the following proposal we discuss how this has come
					about and justify our belief in broadly defined Digital Humanities (DH). 


				
UCLDH does not think of itself as a DH centre in the conventional form, where
					anyone working on DH must come and work in one central facility. Instead, it is
					built on a hypertextual metaphor: it is the hub of a network, bringing together
					work being done in different departments and research centres within UCL and
					beyond. This is one of the reasons for our inclusive philosophy. We do not
					believe it is for us to tell people whether they are doing DH, as we conceive of
					it. If they would like to become part of our network, then we welcome their
					involvement, since we believe that exciting new research can be created from
					synergies in such a network, and by unexpected collaborations between
					disciplines. To this end we run various different networking events such as
					Digital Excursions. These visits to different parts of UCL and other cultural
					heritage institutions such as the British Library allow participants to find out
					about research and digital facilities they might never previously have been
					aware of, and to meet and talk to others whom they might never have come across.
					Connections created by these meetings may take DH forward in ways we cannot
					predict, let alone define. 


				
UCL has unique assets as a basis for Digital Humanities research in the form of
					Museums and Collections and Library Special Collections, and digital art work
					being produced at the Slade School of Art. We are also fortunate that our
					location in central London means that we are close to many of the world’s
					greatest Libraries, Museums and galleries. As a result one of the main
					directions in which UCLDH has sought to extend the definition of what DH might
					be is in working with cultural heritage and memory institutions. For example we
					are working with the British Museum, the Museum of London, the Victoria and
					Albert Museum on a project that will help us better to understand the needs and
					behaviours of users of digital museum objects. We have doctoral students
					undertaking research at various institutions, including: the British Library, to
					look at the use of their mass digitisation projects; The London Metropolitan
					Archive, where image processing will be used to try and decipher the Grand
					Parchment which is too damaged and deteriorated to read; The Science Museum,
					where the use of 3D scans of museum objects will be evaluated by the general
					public; and the British Museum, where work will be done on curatorial
					documentation of 3D scans to investigate standards and protocols for 3D capture
					of artefacts.


				
UCL has world leading research in both humanities, computer science and
					engineering, and we believe that as a result it is vital to engage all parts of
					the university’s research base equally in the DH endeavour. We aim to create new
					knowledge both in computer science and engineering and in the humanities, as
					part of the same research projects. We think of computer scientists as equal
					research partners in our work. Computing is not conceived of as existing to
					provide a service to facilitate humanities research. Thus DH research takes
					place in the Department of Computer Science as often as in the faculty of Arts
					and Humanities. One project led by one of UCLDH’s associate directors, aims to
					develop algorithms to reconstruct the Minoan wall paintings of ancient Thera.
					This will lead to advances in computational methods, but it also aims to
					redefine the existing conservation and assembly process, helping archaeologists
					to create reconstructions of the frescoes, and to study them in ways that would
					previously have been impossible.


				
We also believe in engaging with the users of digital resources, whether they are
					in academia, cultural heritage, or the broader interested public. This is the
					biggest possible tent that we might pitch for DH. We are highly engaged with
					social media in our own work, as evidenced by the UCLDH blog, and out Twitter
					presence (#UCLDH). However, beyond this, several of our research projects
					involve social networking or crowd sourcing, and aim to engage the public well
					beyond academia with their heritage. Transcribe Bentham (
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/
) allows users to access
					digital copies of Jeremy Betham’s original letters, to learn about the
					intricacies of transcribing primary sources, and then to contribute transcribed
					text back to the digital collection. The QRator project will use QR codes to
					allow museum visitors to contribute their interpretation of objects to digital
					interactive labels using a smart phone app. This means that crowd sourced
					understanding of museum objects can complement the once monolithic curatorial
					interpretation of what visitors ought to be seeing.


				
Stretching the tent even more widely, UCLDH has also caught the imagination of
					the wider DH and cultural heritage community internationally with its successful
					discussion group. Decoding Digital Humanities (DDH) This is an informal
					discussion group about DH established and organised by research students and
					staff from UCLDH. It meets monthly and is attended by students, researchers and
					cultural heritage practitioners from London and the south of England as well as
					those from UCL. It also has five new international chapters: two in Australia,
					and in the USA, Belgium and Portugal. 


				
Our definition of the big, interdisciplinary tent also includes teaching and
					learning. Our new Masters (
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh/courses/mamsc
) will be a
					highly innovative interdisciplinary programme: the first in the world to have a
					dual designation of MA and MSc, reflecting once again our sense of the dual
					balance of our field. Its diverse choice of options from a wide range of
					disciplines responds to the complex nature of DH, including modules from
					engineering, computer science, geography, archaeology, anthropology,
					architectural studies, psychology and information studies as well as pure
					humanities. It also reflects the needs of the students, the skills required for
					a new generation of scholars as well as those wishing to pursue a career outside
					academia. We will also release a substantial amount of the core materials as
					open access digital learning objects as part of the JISC Open Educational
					Resources programme: further evidence of a commitment to openness and broad
					public engagement in teaching as well as research.


				
The guiding principles of our approach to DH are predicated on welcoming the
					sense of a field that is growing and in flux. We do not want to put up fences,
					and create definitions of arcane knowledge which initiates must possess to be
					part of our exclusive club. We wish to open wide the doors of this amazingly
					diverse discipline to any and all of those who would like to take part. We
					believe that DH should create new knowledge in both parts of the equation, of
					digital technologies and humanities scholarship. We believe that DH should
					embrace memory institutions and cultural heritage. We believe that DH should
					involve those who use digital resources, allowing them to contribute their ideas
					and content to resources, as well as being consulted about their design. But
					ultimately, to be true to our principles, we believe that is it not our task to
					define DH at UCLDH. In the spirit of social media, we propose that the
					definition of the field should be allowed to develop organically, taking into
					account the views and input of those who participate in it, within and beyond
					the academy. Our view of DH is crowd sourced, inclusive and ever growing: big
					tent Digital Humanities in practice. 

			
		
References:

			
				
					

						Meloni, J
						2010
						 “Reporting from ‘Academic Summer Camp’: the Digital
							Humanities Summer Institute. ProfHacker, June 10, 2010, ” 
						
         (
link
)
   
					

					

						Terras, M.
						2010
						 “DH2010 Plenary: Present, Not Voting: Digital Humanities in
							the Panopticon Digital Humanities, 2010, Kings College London, ” 
						
         (
link
)
   
					

					

						Unsworth, J.
						2010
						 “The State of Digital Humanities, Digital Humanities Summer
							Institute, University of Victoria, Canada, June 2010, ” 
						
         (
link
)
   
					

				
			
		