Poster: Virtual Touch. Towards an Interdisciplinary Research Agenda for the Arts and
                    Humanities

                    Bentkowska-Kafel, Anna, 
                    Centre for Computing in the Humanities, King’s College, London,
                        UK, 
                    
anna.bentkowska@kcl.ac.uk

                

                    Giachritsis, Christos, 
                    SyMoN lab, University of Birmingham, UK, 
                    
c.giachritsis@bham.ac.uk

                

                    Prytherch, David, 
                    User-lab, Birmingham Institute of Art and Design, Birmingham City
                        University, UK, 
                    
david.prytherch@bcu.ac.uk

                

                
The term 'haptics' encompasses two areas of study: human and machine haptics. The
                    first relates to the study of the perception of the world through the sense of
                    touch. It includes proprioception (one’s awareness of one’s own body position in
                    space) as well as cutaneous information (one’s awareness of skin deformations).
                    Machine haptics relates to the design and development of devices that simulate
                    the haptic properties of physical objects. In principle, they are incorporated
                    in virtual environments and allow users to experience tactile properties of
                    virtual objects such as size, shape, weight, compliance and texture.

            
            
                
Virtual Artefact. A Different Approach

                
The virtual artefact has firmly established itself as a research tool within
                    several disciplines of the Arts and Humanities. Many art and material culture
                    historians and professionals rely on digital records and visualisations of
                    artefacts in their research, teaching and practice. We have witnessed, from the
                    1990s onwards, how the virtual artefact has increasingly become photo-realistic
                    and interactive, and how it continues to evolve. The virtual artefact can now be
                    part of a complex, collaborative research environment. With the enhanced
                    technical specifications comes the interest in exploring the research potential
                    of virtual artefacts further. We are here concerned with enhanced simulation of
                    the real experience of physical objects through the application of haptic
                    interfaces, or virtual touch technologies. We believe that the addition of
                    virtual touch would also contribute to greater usability of the existing, often
                    neglected electronic resources and libraries of 3D artefacts. 

                
Research into the use of haptic interfaces–that is devices engaging the sense of
                    touch in virtual environments–in the Arts and Humanities is in its infancy.
                    Although virtual simulation of physical touch has resulted in important advances
                    in other disciplines–such as medicine, neuro-science, telemanipulation control
                    systems and product design–the potential of such applications to humanities
                    scholarship has not yet been explored. Very few researchers in the Arts and
                    Humanities have had an opportunity to experience haptic devices first hand and
                    to develop a critical understanding of such systems and the perceptual processes
                    involved. There have been some important and promising developments in the area
                    of heritage science, such as the Haptic Museum in the US, being the work of
                    Margaret McLaughlin et al. (2000) at the University of
                    Southern California, Annenberg and the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural
                    History; the Museum of Pure Form (Bergamasco et al.,
                    2005) and ‘Touching the Untouchable: Increasing Access to Archaeological
                    Artefacts by Virtual Handling’ in the UK, supported by the Arts and Humanities
                    Research Council and Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. 

                
 The authors are investigating certain fundamental questions:

                
                    
Is virtual touch likely to enhance the ways in which we carry out and
                        communicate research in those areas of the Arts and Humanities that employ
                        3D visualisations of material culture?

                    
How much do we learn about artefacts by touching them?

                    
Would simulating this experience through a haptic interface enhance
                        virtual fieldwork?

                    
Who can possibly benefit from this experience and how?

                    
If ‘seeing with vision that feels, feeling with fingers that see’ (Goethe,
                        1788) is possible, to what extent can this experience be mediated by a
                        haptic system?

                
            
            
                
To Touch or not to Touch?

                
A notice ‘DO NOT TOUCH’ is familiar in many museums and heritage sites and the
                    reasons why this measure is necessary are commonly understood. Most museum
                    managers and curators embrace the notion that touching object collections are
                    important. However, many of the most tactually alluring artefacts present
                    conservation problems that are difficult to overcome. Yet, the existence of ‘DO
                    NOT TOUCH’ simply demonstrates the visitor’s compelling ‘NEED TO TOUCH’ the
                    artefact. This need originates from the fact that the sense of touch can provide
                    us with haptic-specific information about an object such as absolute size,
                    material compliance, texture, temperature and weight, which cannot be reliably
                    obtained through the audio-visual senses. Therefore, a solution which would
                    allow visitors, curators and researchers in Arts & Humanities to experience
                    these tactile properties without compromising the integrity of the artefact is
                    likely to be very welcome and highly valuable. 

                
The latest haptic technologies can provide a way forward which satisfies both the
                    visitors’ and researcher’s desire to handle and the museums’ necessity to
                    conserve collections for future generations. An early 'proof of concept' pilot
                    study was conducted with randomly arriving museum visitors, which looked at the
                    potential for the substitution of real object handling with touching virtual 3D
                    replicas via a low resolution, low cost, commercially available haptic interface
                    (PhanTom Omni) coupled with a stereoscopic (3D) visual display (Fig. 1). 

                        
Fig. 1 'Feeling' a virtual replica of an object from the Potteries
                            Museum, Stoke-on-Trent, UK, using the portable haptic system based on a
                            PhanTom Omni, SenseGraphics 3D Mobile Immersive Workbench. Photo: D.
                            Prytherch

                        
Full Size Image 

                     The visitor feedback offered interesting insights into the potential
                    of the haptic display of virtual objects to enhance the experience of museum
                    visitors by allowing them to interact with virtual artefacts through touch. An
                    informal trial with a blind member of museum staff demonstrated that he was able
                    to identify the shape of the object and gain some insight into the surface
                    carving and texture of the object, despite the real artefact being untouchable.
                    The same portable haptic system was used in the classroom when teaching a
                    masters module in Digital Arts and Culture and received valuable feedback from
                    the students (Fig. 2).
                    

                        
Fig. 2 Haptics in the classroom. A postgraduate course in Digital Arts and
                            Culture, Centre for Computing in the Humanities, King's College London, UK,
                            24 November 2010. Photo: A. Bentkowska-Kafel. Insert: Laser scanning of the
                            Bride (Potteries Museum, Stoke-on-Trent, UK) to create a virtual 3D replica.
                            Photo: D. Prytherch.

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
Archaeologists, art historians, restorers, palaeographers and other specialists
                    who examine artefacts through touch to assess and authenticate their material,
                    execution and other tactile qualities, might also be interested in haptic access
                    to material ex situ when direct access is not possible. The capacity of human
                    haptic perception–the ability to perceive the world through the sense of
                    touch–to differentiate qualities of material, is incredibly rich and we learn
                    much about the form and composition of an artefact from our sensitivity to
                    thermal conduction and fine surface textural qualities through touch. Current
                    commercial haptic devices do not make effective use of tactile (or cutaneous)
                    cues, that is the physical properties of objects which are perceived through
                    skin mechanoreceptors. Technologies that do operate at this level are either
                    experimental, lab-based systems or, if commercially available, are extremely
                    expensive, as well as being complex to setup and maintain. Certain limitations
                    inherent in the whole concept of virtual representations of objects, notably
                    weight and balance, which are dependant not on the virtual object itself, but on
                    the properties of the specific device with which we feel it, need to be
                    resolved.

                
The virtual artefact has opened up unprecedented possibilities for new research
                    into the material culture of the past. Digital technology supporting
                    visualisation of heritage is becoming ever more sophisticated and many projects
                    of this kind seek to better the accompanying scholarly apparatus. The
                    publication of the London Charter for the Computer-based
                        Visualisation of Cultural Heritage (version 2.1, February 2009), is a
                    step in this direction. Some scholars working in this area claim that their
                    visualisations of ancient sites re-create the real human experience of ‘being
                    there’. Some believe that digital visualisation itself may ‘include sight,
                    hearing, and potentially in the future, smell, taste, and touch’ (Mudge, 2011).
                    The lack of tactile experience is one of the significant issues inherent to
                    digital visualisation of heritage. In addition, our limited knowledge of the
                    real-life processes that we are trying to simulate through the use of digital
                    media is always a challenge. We need to better understand the perceived
                    discrepancies between the real object and its virtual record. 

            
            
                
'Feeling with a Seeing Hand' (Goethe, 1788)

                
In the process of gaining knowledge about the real world,
                        vision allows us to explore the environment instantly
                    and provides us with information about object properties such as 3D shape,
                    colour, texture, condition, relative size, relative distance as well as events
                    such as motion or changes of all these visual properties. Even when looking
                    close-up is possible our knowledge is still incomplete. This is because vision
                    alone does not allow us to perceive important physical properties of materials
                    such as weight, centre of mass, temperature, surface roughness, hardness and
                    actual size. In order to perceive these properties we need to engage touch. Touch allows us to perceive the properties which
                    are essential for effective interaction with the physical
                    world. By exploring an object through touch, we can form a better understanding
                    of its purpose and use, and develop insights to inform us about its past users.
                    For example, it is not possible to appreciate the physical endurance of an
                    ancient warrior just by viewing a shield he might have used. For this, it is
                    necessary to engage touch: lift and carry it.

                
Although still relatively primitive (comparing to advances in visual displays),
                    current haptic interfaces (HI) allow a range of haptic and tactile interaction
                    with virtual objects, from the exploration with one or multiple fingers with one
                    or two hands (Giachritsis et al., 2009; Giachritsis et al., 2010; Monroy et al., 2008)
                    (Fig. 3) to more immersive experience involving movements from arm joints.
                    

                        
Fig. 3 Bimanual manipulation of a virtual object using precision grip with
                            the haptic interface device Master Finger 2.

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                    Haptic applications vary from simple touch of the virtual object to real-life
                    probes used as medical or artistic tools for working on object surface. The
                    extensive industrial and academic research in advancing HI shows the impact of
                    these technologies on the way people learn, train, work and entertain themselves
                    in virtual environments. Despite their limitations, HI technologies already
                    offer significant advantages to users of virtual environments by allowing them a
                    more realistic interaction with virtual objects.
                
Recent advances in recording art objects, made possible by such technologies as
                    photogrammetry, touch probing and 3D structured light or colour laser scanning,
                    have augmented the already considerable body of virtual artefacts, created
                    primarily through Virtual Reality (VRML) modelling, with records of
                    unprecedented accuracy. The E-Curator project carried out by the University
                    College London Museum Collections and partners, used 3D colour scans of various
                    artefacts captured with an Arius scanner, to develop a traceable, grid-based
                    dissemination and visualisation system. This system enables museum curators and
                    conservators to identify and assess objects remotely in a collaborative,
                    networked environment. The addition of haptic interfaces engaging the sense of
                    touch seems an obvious future development. The question is which particular
                    aspects of human touch these devices should simulate so that they could be
                    useful to heritage professionals? 

            
            
                
Towards a Research Agenda for the Arts and Humanities

                
If the promise of more intuitive and multisensory computing–than the one with
                    which we are familiar today–is real, we should investigate how these future
                    developments in information technologies may affect our own disciplines. We
                    argue for the need to explore the potential benefit of haptic interaction as an
                    addition to audio-visual experiences of virtual artefacts. How much do we learn
                    about artefacts by touching them? Would simulating this experience through a
                    haptic interface enhance virtual fieldwork? Who can possibly benefit from this
                    experience and how? If Goethe's (1788) ‘seeing with vision that feels, feeling
                    with fingers that see’ is possible, to what extent can this experience be
                    mediated by a haptic system? We will not be certain of the answers, nor have
                    influence over the future of multisensory computing, unless we explore whether
                    current developments and wide-ranging research meets our varied expectations. 

                
The authors propose a research agenda in this area is made from the four
                    positions: 1) digital scholarship of material culture; 2) the contribution of
                    human vision and touch in the perception and appreciation of real and virtual
                    environments; 3) haptic interface design and applications, and 4) haptic access
                    to 3D records of art objects within networked collaborative environments.

                
 The authors seek to investigate the level of interest of those engaged in
                    historical and cultural studies in researching the potential benefits of adding
                    virtual touch to virtual artefacts for the advancement of cultural heritage
                    scholarship and education. Expressions of such interest and comments are
                    welcome.

            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Brewster, S.A.
                        2005
                         “The Impact of Haptic ‘Touching’ Technology on Cultural
                            Applications, ” 
                        Digital Applications for Cultural Heritage
                            Institutions, 
                        Hemsley, J., Cappellini, V., and Stanke, G.
                        Ashgate
                        Aldershot
                        273-284
                    

                    

                        E-Curator Project, University College London, 
                        14 March 2011
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Frisoli, A., Jansson, G., Bergamasco, M. and Loscos, C.
                        2005
                         “Evaluation of the Museum of Pure Form Displays Used for
                            Exploration of Works of Art at Museums, ” 
                        Proc. World Haptics Conference
                            2005, 
                        Pisa, 
                        18-20 March 2005
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Giachritsis, C., Barrio, J., Ferre, M., Wing, A., and Ortego,
                            J.
                        2009
                         “Evaluation of Weight Perception During Unimanual and
                            Bimanual Manipulation of Virtual Objects, ” 
                        Third Joint Eurohaptics Conference and
                            Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator
                            Systems, 
                        Salt Lake City, UT, 
                        18-20 March 2009
                    

                    

                        Giachritsis, C.D., Garcia-Robledo, P. Jr., Barrio, J., Wing, A.M.
                            and Ferre, M.
                        2010
                         “Unimanual, Bimanual and Bilateral Weight Perception of
                            Virtual Objects in the Master Finger 2 Environment, ” 
                        19th IEEE International Symposium on
                            Robot and Human Interactive Communication, 
                        Principe di Piemonte - Viareggio, Italy, 
                        12-15 September 2010
                    

                    

                        Goethe, J.W. von
                        1988
                        Roman Elegies, VII [1788], 
                        Routledge
                        London
                    

                    

                        London Charter for the Computer-based Visualisation of
                            Cultural Heritage, 
                        14 March 2011
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        McLAUGHLIN, M., L., Sukhatme, G., Shahabi, C., Medioni, G. and
                            Jaskowiak, J.
                        2000
                         “The Haptic Museum, ” 
                        Proc. EVA Conference on Electronic
                            Imaging and the Visual Arts, 
                        Florence, 
                        2000
                    

                    

                        Mudge, M.
                        forthcoming
                         “Transparency for Empirical Data, ” 
                        Paradata and Transparency in Heritage Visualisation, 
                        A. Bentkowska-Kafel et al. eds
                        Ashgate
                        Aldershot
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Monroy, M., Oyarzabal, M., Ferre, M., Campos, A. and Barrio,
                            J.
                        2008
                         “MasterFinger: Multi-finger Haptic Interface for
                            Collaborative Environments, ” 
                        Proceedings of Eurohaptics ’08, 
                        Madrid, 
                        10-13 June 2008 
                        411-419
                    

                    

                        Prytherch, D. and Jefsioutine, M.
                        2007
                         “Touching Ghosts: Haptic technologies in museums, ” 
                        The Power of Touch: Handling Objects in Museum and Heritage
                            Contexts, 
                        Pye, E.
                        Left Coast Press
                        Walnut Creek, CA
                        223-40
                    

                    

                        Touching the Untouchable: Increasing Access to
                            Archaeological Artefacts by Virtual Handling, 
                        14 March 2011
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                
            
        