Paper: Development of Digital Projects as Learning Strategies. The Desingcrea/Diseñoteca
               Project

               Rodríguez, Nuria, 
               University of Malaga (Spain), 
               
nro@uma.es
In the last Digital Humanities conference in London (July 2010), several of those
               present expressed the need for educational strategies based on digital projects. The
               reasons can be summarised as follows: firstly, given the difficult sustainability of
               these types of projects, the help of students in their development could be a key
               factor in their upholding. Secondly, participating in real digital projects could
               help these students gain an array of essential competences in the digital society in
               which they will develop their professional work. 


            
Bearing this in mind, the aim of this paper is to present a case of educational
               innovation, financed by the University of Malaga since 2006, which I believe can
               respond to the concerns expressed in London. 

         

         
            
The Desingcrea/Diseñoteca Project 


            
The Desingcrea/Diseñoteca project was originally created to redefine the practical
               aspect of certain subjects within the degree of Technical Industrial Design
               Engineering given in the Polytechnic Institute of the University of Malaga. 


            
Specifically, our aim was to develop collective learning strategies that could lead
               to significant and relevant training, involving the student in the development of
               his/her own knowledge. In order to do this we decided that the new possibilities of
               virtual interaction brought about by the Information and Communication Technologies,
               as proposed in the Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) theory, social participation
               web environments (2.0), combined with the educational principles of Pedagogic
               Constructivism (Mitchel Rescnick, 1996) and Conectivism (G. Siemens, 2006), offered
               the perfect framework on which to base this project. 


            
Taking an objective based educational model as a starting point, we decided that all
               these strategies revolved around a common objective: the development of an industrial
               design database, which we called Diseñoteca, which in turn would be integrated into a
               web portal also dedicated to industrial design (Desingcrea). The idea was that
               Desingcrea/Diseñoteca would be developed progressively through the collective work of
               students, who would be responsible for the preparation of its material and content,
               through tasks incorporated into the teaching programme of certain subjects of the
               degree. Once developed, the Desingcrea/Diseñoteca system would work as an online
               resource available to all students, who could use it as a tool for consultation,
               study and debate. 

         

         
            
Desingcrea/Diseñoteca: Design and Structure 


            
Desingcrea/Diseñotca is a web application developed specifically by computer
               engineers from the University of Malaga for this project1. Updates carried out on the
               system aimed to transform an informational system, based on the «database»
               philosophy, into a learning community, based on the «social network» or «2.0» theory,
               bringing together users interested in industrial design, amongst them our students,
               who were responsible for its dynamization. 


            
Desingcrea/Diseñoteca focuses on the industrial design, therefore the entire
               information published on this website is around this subject matter. As well as
               informative sections, created by the students, such as directories, bibliographical
               indexes, etc., the Desingcrea portal has resources common to web 2.0, such as the
               publication of news and articles as blogs, the possibility for users to evaluate the
               contents, RSS, tag clouds and the capacity to link these contents to other existing
               resources on the Network (text, images, web pages, etc.). It is therefore possible to
               create a real, open and global network about industrial design, which students use as
               a personalised learning environment. [Fig. 1 and 2]. 


                  
Fig. 1. Desingcrea website. 1 <designcrea.uma.es> 

                  
Full Size Image 

               
               


                  
Fig. 2. Blogs written by students at Desingcrea website. 

                  
Full Size Image 

               
            
            
The Diseñoteca database, which is integrated into the Desingcrea website, is also
               being developed through the collective work of students. Industrial design objects
               are registered in a structured manner within Diseñoteca. It is made up of data
               records in which participants describe and classify the design objects according to a
               protocol of standards and metadata. [Fig. 3] 


                  
Fig. 3. Diseñoteca’ s record. Simple display showing the assessment given by
                     students.

                  
Full Size Image 

               

            
In order to create this data register, the principal source used was The Categories
               for the Description of works of Art (CDWA), of the Getty Research Institute (1998),
               which was updated in the work Cataloging Cultural Objects (Baca, 2006), of American
               Library Association Editions. The result is a more specific example of this standard
               that we call Categories for the description of industrial design objects (CDOID), and
               that will be the object of a future publication. 


            
The system offers students the possibility to discuss the records of their
               classmates, contributing data and information that enrich the description of the
               object. Besides, in this way the collective participation in the creation of contents
               and the exchange of ideas is increased. 


            
Likewise, students can assess these records using tools common to the repositories of
               the social web. This assessment will act as a co-evaluation, complementing the final
               grade given by the teacher. [Fig. 3]. 


            
Management and monitoring of students. Each teacher is assigned a specific number of
               students to monitor. A series of features have been installed on the system so that
               students are monitored in the most complete way possible. In this way it is possible
               for the teacher to see the records that have been created and edited by any student
               and consult his/her record history, seeing the different actions and tasks that have
               been carried out. This way the system not only shows us the amount of time that the
               student has been connected to the Internet, but also the tasks that he/she has
               actually carried out and therefore if the student has really been working. [Fig. 4]. 

                  
Fig. 4. Display for the teacher profile with the report of the student´s
                     work and actions. 

                  
Full Size Image 

               
            

            
Finally, given that one of the aims of Desingcrea/Diseñoteca, as mentioned, is to
               work as an information and meeting website for all those interested in industrial
               design, a validation tool has been incorporated into the system as a means to
               guarantee the quality of the process. That is, information introduced into
               Desingcrea/Diseñoteca is not made public to users until it has been corrected and
               validated by the teacher in charge. 

         

         
            
What does Desingcrea/Diseñoteca Bring to the Learning of Students? 


            
According to results obtained since this project began in 2006, I list the following
               aspects which could be applied to any similar, digital based projects. 


            

               
The students have become familiar with work concepts and systems common to the
                  design and execution of digital projects, offering them an invaluable preparation
                  in facing this type of project in the future. For example, they have become
                  familiar with the use of metadata, and have become aware of the need for their
                  systematic and coherent use, an idea that is not always sufficiently adopted
                  amongst humanities specialists. 


               
With regards to the pedagogic use of 2.0 tools, the potential of blog type
                  applications to encourage critical thinking should be underlined. News and
                  articles published by students, as contents on the Desingcrea portal, can be
                  discussed and assessed by their own classmates, favouring the exchange of ideas
                  and encouraging debate amongst them. 


               
The possibility of linking information published on Desingcrea/Diseñoteca with
                  other news, portals and sites on the Network, helps students to familiarise
                  themselves with the idea of the Network as a global data repository where
                  knowledge is produced through the significant connection of information nodes. 


               
While creating Designcrea/Diseñoteca, a collaborative project based on the
                  contributions of participants on an open system which, at the same time, is
                  incorporated globally into the Network from which it is also fuelled, students are
                  encouraged to integrate themselves into the so called open and shared knowledge
                  culture. This culture is associated to the thinking behind 2.0 and defines the new
                  paradigm of knowledge that, based on the concepts of both Rheingold’s Smart Mobs
                  (2000) and Lévy’s Collective intelligence (1994, 1998), is shaping our
                  contemporary society (UNESCO, 2005). 


            

            
During the paper, these ideas will be developed in more detail and other significant
               results will be presented. 

         
      
References:

         
            
               
Baca M.
                  2006Cataloging Cultural Objects: A Guide to
                     Describing Works and Their Images, Chicago:
                     American Library Association Editions


               
Cabero Almenara, J.
                  2007Diseño y producción de TIC para la formación:
                     nuevas tecnologías de la información y la comunicación, .
                     BarcelonaUOC


               
Fisher, D. L. and KHINE, M. S.
                  2006Contemporary approaches to research on learning
                     environments: worldviews, New Jersey
                  World Scientific


               
Lévy, P.
                  1994L'intelligence collective. Pour une
                     anthropologie du cyberespace, París
                  La Découverte


               
Lévy, P.
                  1998L’intelligence collective, une nouvelle utopie
                     de la communication?,  Available at: 
         (
link
)
   
               


               
Litwin, E.
                  2005Tecnologías educativas en tiempos de
                     Internet, Buenos Aires, Madrid:
                     Amorrortu
               


               
Mitchel Resnick, Y. K.
                  1996Constructionism in practice: designing,
                     thinking, and learning in a digital world, Mahwah (New
                     Jersey)LEA


               
Rheingold, H.
                  2002Smart Mobs. The Next Social
                     Revolution, CambridgePerseus
                     Publishing


               
Seely Brown, J.
                  2002 “Growing Up Digital: How the Web Changes Work,
                     Education, and the Ways People Learn, ” Change, 
                  10-20


               
Siemans, G.
                  2006Knowing Knowledge,  Available at 
         (
link
)
   


               
UNESCO
                  2005Hacia las sociedades del conocimiento, ,
                     Ediciones UNESCO

            
         
      