 Panel: Literary Practice and the Digital Humanities, Redux: Data as/and
                  Poetry

                  Raley, Rita, 
                  Associate Professor of English, University of California, Santa
                     Barbara, 
                  
raley@english.ucsb.edu

               

                  Baldwin, Sandy, 
                  Associate Professor of English and Director of the Center for
                     Literary Computing, West Virginia University, 
                  
clc@mail.wvu.edu

               
Montfort, Nick, 
                  Associate Professor of Digital Media, MIT, 
                  
nickm@nickm.com

               
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah, 
                   Associate Professor of Computer Science, University of California,
                     Santa Cruz , 
                  
nwf@soe.ucsc.edu

               
Cayley, John , 
                   Visiting Professor of Literary Arts, Brown University, 
                  
cayley@shadoof.net

               

         
            
This panel brings together four of the central theorist-practitioners in the field of
               what is commonly called electronic literature for a discussion of the question of
               data as/and poetry. Drawing on a range of aesthetic and discursive traditions – from
               sublimity to communication theory – panelists will consider the structural and
               operational logics of writing in programmable and networked media. As a foundation
               for more general theoretical inquiry, they will engage specific compositional
               practices ranging from Perl poetry generators to writing with and against Google
               search algorithms. In broad terms, then, the panel will contribute to the
               conversation about the role and function of literary aesthetics and practices in the
               digital humanities. It is in sympathy with the “material turn” in the digital
               humanities toward the platform and the mechanism, but it seeks more fully to
               understand the relations between material form and aesthetic effects (and affects). 


            
Sandy Baldwin considers the problem of data and poetry in terms of what might be
               called the unaccountable or “wayward.” He argues that such waywardness is
               historically and formally tied to poetry, situating data in the discourse of the
               sublime and in relation to a tradition of the metaphoric and the figural. As poetic
               discourse, the wayward or unaccountable is a problematic enunciative tactic, the
               rhetorical “lighting up” of detritus into significance and readability. Various
               “codework” practices can be seen as pursuing such tactics as uttering data and
               enunciating the author’s name through the data midden. Nick Montfort discusses some
               of the textures of data and code, and the complexity of these two categories, in
               Montfort’s ppg256 (Perl Poetry Generator in 256 Characters)
               series. Even in the acrostic method of Jackson Mac Low, the set of “data” consists of
               two different sorts of data, source text and seed text, that are used differently. In
               the ppg256 series, the only textual “data” is in quoted
               strings embedded in the code. Despite these complexities, making the distinction
               between code and data is important to understanding how ppg256
               generators work and is important to the poetics underlying these programs. Noah
               Wardrip-Fruin’s presentation traces one particular birth narrative of an operational
               logic, that of the n-gram as a literary logic. It connects mathematicians such as
               Claude Shannon and Andrei Markov, the contributors to popular personal computer
               publications such as Byte Magazine and Scientific American, as well as figures such as Hugh Kenner and Charles O.
               Hartman. Finally, in contrast, the independent development of literary n-gram
               techniques by artists such as John Cayley is used to ask whether such logics are as
               different from collision detection (and others representing the physical world) as
               they may seem. John Cayley’s remarks will be directed to those tools, instruments and
               services that now give us close-to-no-cost access to indexed, mapped, statistically
               modeled, data-driven views of the largest corpus of language practice on the planet.
               He will do this with reference to three ongoing projects: ‘writing to be found,’
               which explores techniques for generating aesthetic linguistic forms with=against
               services like Google; The Readers Project (with Daniel C.
               Howe), which might be thought of as ‘writing through visualizing reading’; and The
               Natural Language Liberation Front, which engages, agonistically, with the
               institutions and institutional consequences of all these new relations of literary
               production. 

         

      