Tutorial: Introductory TEI ODD

                    Cummings, James, 
                    Oxford University Computing Services, 
                    
james.cummings@oucs.ox.ac.uk

                

                    Rahtz, Sebastian, 
                    Oxford University Computing Services, 
                    
sebastian.rahtz@oucs.ox.ac.uk

                
Abstract

                
ODD (One Document Does it all) is the XML vocabulary which the Text Encoding
                    Initiative has developed to describe itself, and which users of the TEI employ
                    to customize the TEI and create documentation and schemas appropriate to their
                    varied needs. It can be used to document and describe any XML vocabulary.
                    Attendees are expected to have some basic knowledge of XML and the TEI.

                
Introductory TEI ODD is a three-hour tutorial taught by the TEI@Oxford team
                    (James Cummings and Sebastian Rahtz) on using TEI ODD for documenting and
                    constraining your project's TEI XML. This beginners-level course provides a
                    hands-on practical introduction to the basic ideas of the TEI ODD system,
                    exploring the process of designing a TEI profile from the user perspective, and
                    using the TEI's Roma web application to model a schema. We will explore the full
                    capabilities of Roma, from designing and testing a basic XML schema with a few
                    clicks, up to the design of a highly customized and multilingual application
                    profile.

                
Participants will be taught using Roma and the oXygen XML editor. They will
                    define a detailed customization of the TEI, generate schemas and documentation,
                    and have an understanding of the TEI ODD language. This tutorial will equip
                    participants with the necessary skills to customize the TEI for their project's
                    specific needs.

            
            
                
Tutorial Structure

                
                    
Talk 1: An introduction to TEI ODD concepts and the Roma Web Application
                        (30min)

                    
Exercise 1: Creating your first TEI customization (30 min)

                    
Talk 2: More complicated TEI customizations (30 min)

                    
Exercise 2: Constraining and Extending the TEI for your Project (30
                        min)

                    
Talk 3: The TEI ODD Format: What is happening underneath? (30 min)

                    
Exercise 3: Editing the underlying TEI ODD files (30 min)

                
            
            
                
Contact Information

                
Dr James Cummings, Oxford University Computing Services, 13 Banbury Road, Oxford,
                    OX2 6NN, UK. +44-1865-283296, james.cummings@oucs.ox.ac.uk

                
Bio: Dr James Cummings helps to manage a team of developers in the Oxford
                    University Computing Services working on digital humanities projects. He is a
                    member of the TEI@Oxford group providing training and support for TEI projects
                    and has served on the TEI Technical Council since 2004. He is the elected
                    director of the Digital Medievalist project.

                
Sebastian Rahtz, Oxford University Computing Services, 13 Banbury Road, Oxford,
                    OX2 6NN, UK. +44-1865-283431, sebastian.rahtz@oucs.ox.ac.uk

                
Bio: Sebastian Rahtz manages the Information and Support Group inside the Oxford
                    University Computing Services. He is is a member of the TEI@Oxford group
                    providing training and support for TEI projects, was a member of the TEI Board
                    of Directors from 2000 to 2009, and has been a member of the TEI Technical
                    Council since 2001. He was lead architect for the ODD system in TEI P5, and has
                    written much of the software which underpins the TEI's work.

            
            
                
Previous venues

                
Although substantially modified, much of this material has been tested out for a
                    much smaller group in an Understanding ODD pre-conference workshop for the TEI
                    Members' Meeting and Conference 2010.

                
The tutors have taught TEI on summer schools at Oxford for the last 5 years to
                    groups of c.20 delegates, and regular teach TEI concepts to small groups.

            
        