Poster: Modelling a Web Based Editing Environment for Critical Editions

                    Litta Modignani Picozzi, Eleonora, 
                    Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College
                        London, 
                    
eleonora.litta@kcl.ac.uk

                

                    Noël, Geoffroy, 
                    Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College
                        London, 
                    
geoffroy.noel@kcl.ac.uk

                

                    Pierazzo, Elena, 
                    Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College
                        London, 
                    
elena.pierazzo@kcl.ac.uk

                
Critical editions can be complex objects to digitise both in the
                    output/publication process and in the production.

                
In most cases, for the output, there is the need to manage facsimiles, a main
                    text (with lots of diacritics, deletions, suppressions, supplied text), an
                    apparatus (with a very dense, conventional notation), footnotes (with cross
                    references and bibliographic references), and conventional markings for page
                    breaks from previous editions and/or manuscripts, in the form of other digitised
                    text or images. 

                
On the production side we have witnesses of the text, forming the direct
                    tradition, in some cases followed by re-elaborations, contemporary or later
                    translations, quotations that form the indirect tradition. This picture is
                    usually completed by previous critical editions, commentaries, and a possibly
                    large set of secondary references from other texts, dictionaries, biographies
                    and prosopographical data. 

                
The present paper will outline an attempt made at the Department for Digital
                    Humanities, King’s College LondonFormerly Centre for Computing in the
                        Humanities. The name has been changed in spring 2011. to produce a
                    model for new editions and translations of all English legal codes, edicts, and
                    treatises produced up to the time of Magna Carta, 1215. 

                
This particular project, called Early English LawsEarly English Laws is
                        currently in the early development stage and the first release of the
                        resource can be found at 
http://www.earlyenglishlaws.ac.uk
, where a list of
                        texts to be encoded has been made available. Funding for the project will be
                        available only for an initial period of three years, during which an
                        interface for the functioning of the whole repository will need to be made
                        available together with a full image database and a number of recently
                        published and new editions. Completion is expected to take ten years, during
                        which several scholars from around the world will volunteer to edit a list
                        of available laws and input their work directly into a web-based interface.
                        This should ideally allow for a minimal amount of reworking by one or two
                        people volunteering to review submissions., presents a situation
                    which is even more complex with respect to what has been outlined above. This is
                    because of two characteristics typical of legal texts: 

                
                    
All the witnesses of a tradition were effective binding laws in a specific
                        place and time, including the mistakes added in the production of the
                        manuscript copy.

                    
Laws were constantly re-elaborated to become new laws and each of these
                        stages of elaboration represents a fully effective law.

                
                
This means that the legal text is regularly transmitted in a number of versions,
                    witnesses of both the direct and the indirect tradition.

                
As a result, each law can be represented as a universe of texts and images that
                    relate to each other: this universe can be exemplified in the figure below, a
                    diagrammatic representation of the so-called Treaty of Edward and Guthrum and
                    its relations, one of which includes an Old English translation which has its
                    own universe of relations (
see figure
                    1
)
                    

                        
Figure 1

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
            
            
                
The development of the project presents a series of problems, for which a series
                    of solutions are being tested and implemented. The Early English Laws project
                    represents a case study of a more general issue, namely how to model critical
                    edition from a conceptual point of view.

            
            
                
The main concern until now has been the need to create a conceptual model for the
                    editions in order to identify the best structure to support the variety of
                    content offered by the project. The difficulty here lies in trying to apply the
                    philological terminology and needs to the level of conceptual discrimination
                    required by the normalisation process involved in the design of a relational
                    database schema that can be able to connect related law codes. For instance the
                    term 'text' is extremely ambiguous as it actually implicitly conveys different
                    concepts such as a work, an edition, a version, a transcription or a translation
                    (Carlyle, 2006). 

                
Failing to identify and address this issue would inevitably lead to a poor
                    organisation of data. This, in turn, would confuse the editorial work and also
                    generate inconsistencies, which will cause problems when developing the
                    editorial environment and web site.

                
The solution to this problem is identifying each component of the text/image
                    universe as entities, their properties and interrelationships can help to
                    disambiguate concepts through the systematic analysis of the sample material.
                    Borrowing elements from the FRBR model is also proving to be very useful in our
                    attempt to discover and separate off hidden conceptual layers in our first
                    version of the data model. The Entity-Relationship representation of the overall
                    data model and the formal and careful definition of problematic concepts
                    provides a shared vocabulary which helps the members of the project team to
                    communicate with precision about the subject domain, whether they are from a
                    programming or indeed from a solely humanistic background (Pierazzo, 2010).
                    Moreover this conceptual data model serves as a basis for the transformation
                    into a database schema, which will support the entire set of resources.

            
            
                
Given the variety of content involved in this project, this transformation into a
                    database will be challenging as well. Indeed, the information captured by this
                    project can be divided in two categories depending the format of its
                    representation (
see figure 2
).
                    

                        
Figure 2

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
                
                    
The entities identified during the modelling process, their properties and
                        the relationships among those entities. These are ideally stored in a
                        relational database. The relational database is also very advantageous for
                        the storage, editing, indexing and referencing of authority lists.

                    
All the information found in the text of the manuscript transcriptions or
                        the peripheral textual information such as the critical apparatus, the
                        introduction text for the manuscript, the comments. The best format for this
                        type of information is XML with conformance to the TEI guidelines.

                
                
The main challenge here is how can we harmoniously combine the two very different
                    types of information within the same database management system, especially when
                    we consider how deeply interrelated they are (e.g. an inline reference from one
                    text to another or to an authority list will consist in inserting a primary key
                    of relational tuples within an attribute of a TEI element).

                
To solve this, we are intending to exploit the XML-oriented facilities offered by
                    recent relational database management systems to keep all the information
                    centralised and linked up despite being hybrid in nature. Substantial custom
                    development to the editing framework (possibly Django) is also expected in order
                    to allow the user interface to acknowledge and seamlessly integrate the two
                    types of data.

            

        
References:

            
                
                    

                        
                            TEI Consortium
                        
                        TEI P5:, 
                        Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                            Interchange, 
                        1.7.0
                        
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        
                    

                    

                        Carlyle, Allyson
                        2006
                         “Understanding FRBR as a conceptual model: FRBR and the
                            bibliographic universe, ” 
                        Library Resources & Technical Services, 
                        50 (4)
                        264-273
                    

                    

                        Danskin, Alan & Chapman, Ann
                        2003
                         “Bibliographic records in the computer age, ” 
                        Library & Information Update, 
                        2 (9)
                        42-43
                    

                    

                        1903–1916
                         “Peace of Edward and Guthrum, ” 
                        Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen, 
                        Liebermann, Felix
                        128–134
                    

                    

                        Pierazzo, Elena 
                        2010
                         “Editorial Teamwork in a Digital Environment, ” 
                        Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie, 
                        10
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                
            
        