Poster: The Wellcome Arabic Manuscripts Project

                    Brey, Gerhard, 
                    Centre for Computing in the Humanities, King's College
                            London, UK, 
                    
gerhard.brey@kcl.ac.uk

                
This poster and software demonstration will present the Wellcome Arabic
                    Manuscripts project. The aim of this project was to create a freely available
                    online catalogue of ca. 500 mainly medical manuscripts written in Arabic that
                    are preserved in the Wellcome Library (London, UK). Apart from the actual
                    manuscript catalogue the outcomes of this project that are of particular
                    relevance to the Digital Humanities are: 
                        
a TEI/ENRICH based XML schema adapted to meet the requirements of
                            cataloguing Arabic manuscripts and in particular to accommodate detailed
                            codicological and textual descriptions

                        
an open source, web-based, customizable cataloguing tool

                        
an online research tool that gives users free access to a wealth of
                            metadata and digitized page images of the manuscripts in this
                            collection

                        
high-quality digital images of each manuscript page linked to rich
                            descriptive metadata.

                    
                
                
The project was partly funded by the Wellcome Trust and partly by a grant from
                    the UK's JISC Islamic Studies Programme [
Henshaw, 2009
]. It is a collaboration between three institutions: 
                        
Wellcome Library, London, UK
http://library.wellcome.ac.uk/

                        
Bibliotheca Alexandrina, Alexandria, Egypt
http://bibalex.org/

                        
King's College London, London, UK
http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cch/

                    
                
                
The Wellcome Library provided the cataloguing expertise and methodology, the
                    digital images, and overall project management, while the web based tools were
                    developed and are hosted by the Bibliotheca Alexandria. King's College London
                    (Centre for Computing in the Humanities) managed the technical requirements
                    specifications for the cataloguing tool, and adapted the TEI/ENRICH XML
                            model
http://library.wellcome.ac.uk/arabicproject.html
. 

                
The cataloguing methodology and the approach to this project was guided by
                    Wellcome's tripartite approach to cataloguing Oriental manuscripts. This
                    approach suggests that a manuscript should be considered as a product of
                    craftsmen, authors and readers and therefore its production, intellectual
                    content and subsequent use. The description of a manuscript is carried out
                    having these three aspects in mind, viewing the manuscript: 
                        
as a museum object (palaeography, codicology)

                        
as an intellectual creation (texts)

                        
under historical user aspect (provenance, owners, editors,
                            etc.)

                    
                
                
As a reflection of this approach the manuscripts were catalogued in much more
                    detail than a typical library manuscript catalogue, particularly in the areas of
                    the materiality of the manuscript and the description of the textual content. In
                    practical terms this approach -- together with the newly created tool described
                    below -- allowed the cataloguing tasks to be allocated according to competence
                    and practicality. The detailed codicological description, best done on the
                    actual physical object, was carried out by conservators at the Wellcome Library,
                    whereas the detailed description of the textual content (down to the
                    transcription of chapter headings) was undertaken by cataloguers at the
                    Bibliotheca Alexandrina. 

                
A key objective of the project was that the encoding model should follow
                    established standards to ensure interoperability of the manuscript catalogue and
                    to make it extendable and as flexible as possible. A model based on
                            TEI
http://www.tei-c.org/
 and the format used
                    by ENRICH
http://enrich.manuscriptorium.com/
 (a
                    European manuscript cataloguing project) was chosen [
Pierazzo, 2010
]. The basic TEI/ENRICH model had to
                    be adapted and customized to accommodate the needs of the tripartite approach.
                    It had to be ensured, for example, that the model is compatible with standards
                    such as Ligatus
http://www.ligatus.org.uk/
, an emerging
                    standard for the detailed description of book binding features. Other extensions
                    to the model were needed to enable the description of the very detailed physical
                    features from a conservator's point of view, such as flaps, endbands, or covers.
                    From a more palaeographical perspective various features relating to the scribe
                    had to be added, for example an element to describe the Mistara, an impression
                    on the paper achieved by applying a kind of stamp that indicated the lines a
                    scribe would then write on. Other important palaeographical features that had to
                    be represented were the coefficients calculated by using the "Pace" method, a
                    system devised by Nikolaj Serikoff [
Serikoff, 2001
] to measure certain features of an Arabic script, such
                    as angles of letters, or the ratio of connected and unconnected letters on a
                    line. These features taken together are quite unique for a scribe or scribal
                    school and help to situate a manuscript chronologically and geographically. In
                    order to adequately represent the intellectual content of the manuscript,
                    further adaptations were made. In order to fully represent compound Muslim
                    names, for example, fields for their constituent parts (e. g. patronymic,
                    honorific) were introduced. Additional incipit-like elements were also needed to
                    hold those formulaic passages at the beginning of Arabic manuscript texts (the
                    Basmallah, or Tahmid that superficially look like invocations, but that also
                    tell about the subject area of the text to follow, or the origin of the author. 

                
In addition to the cataloguing effort by the cataloguers at the Bibliotheca
                    Alexandrina, all of the technical development was undertaken by the Egyptian
                    partners. The two outcomes of this substantial development effort are the web
                    based cataloguing tool for data input and administration by Wellcome and
                    Bibliotheca Alexandrina cataloguers and the online research tool that enables
                    scholars and the wider public access to the rich material via browsing and
                    searching. 

                
The web-based tool was designed to allow the cataloguing of manuscripts into
                    valid TEI XML files without prior specialist XML knowledge. This was achieved
                    via the development of a Schema driven editor (SDXE) together with a
                    "configuration grammar", the XML Skeleton Annotations (XSA) [
Aboulnaga, 2010
]. 

                
The XSA system automatically builds JSF (JavaServer Faces) based XML editors.
                    These editors in turn produce schema compliant XML files that follow a certain
                    XML skeleton. To enable users to author such XML files, the system generates web
                    forms with fields for each data holding XML element in the skeleton. It does
                    this by reading an XML Skeleton Annotations file (XSA.xml) that
                    contains definitions for each location in the XML skeleton including a label, a
                    help text, authority lists, user access rights, and various other information
                    used by the system to generate the web forms. The XSA system uses the Schema
                    Driven XML Editor to generate schema compliant XML files. The steps necessary to
                    generate a website using XSA are as follows: 
                        
authoring of an XSA.xml configuration file

                        
optional creation of facelet templates for look and feel

                        
creation of a blank XML record template

                    
                
                
The central component of the cataloguing tool is the XSA configuration file. By
                    changing this file it is possible to adapt the cataloguing tool for any other
                    similar manuscript cataloguing tasks. 

                
The web based research tool, i.e. the online manuscript catalogue is directed
                    towards both specialist and non-specialist use. This means that it has to
                    provide functionalities that address scholarly users, palaeographers,
                    conservators, but also a wider audience whose specialist fields lie in other
                    areas. The research tool therefore offers entry points into the repository via
                    multiple levels and access routes, such as browsing (alphabetic or faceted) or
                    searching (simple or advanced) for a wide ranging set of criteria. The advanced
                    browsing and searching mechanisms take into account features peculiar to
                    manuscripts in Arabic, for example search by stem or search by root,
                    differentiated again by normalized character forms or defective (i. e. dotless)
                    character forms. 

                
 During the poster session we will give a live demonstration of the web based
                    cataloguing tool and the online research tool. This will showcase the key
                    features of both applications and highlight the problems that were encountered
                    and how they were overcome 

            
            
                
Contributors to the Project

                
                    
Wellcome Library

                    

                        
                            
Dr. Richard Aspin

                            
Dr. Christy Henshaw

                            
Dr. Nikolaj Serikoff

                        
                    
                
                
                    
Bibliotheca Alexandrina

                    

                        
                            
Prof. Magdy Nagi

                            
Dr. Noha Adly

                            
Younos Aboulnaga

                        
                    
                
                
                    
King's College London

                    

                        
                            
Simon Tanner

                            
Dr. Elena Pierazzo

                            
Gerhard Brey

                        
                    
                
            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Aboulnaga, Y.
                        2010
                         “XSA - XSD to configurable JSF UI, ” 
                        software package, 
         (
link
)
   
                        documentation wiki, 
         (
link
)
   
                        October 2010
                    

                    

                        Henshaw, C.
                        2009
                         “JISC funding for the Wellcome Arabic Manuscript Cataloguing
                            Project, ” 
                        Wellcome Library Blog, 
                        14 August 2009
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        October 2010
                    

                    

                        Pierazzo, E.
                        2010
                         “On the Arabic ENRICH schema, ” 
                        Wellcome Library Blog, 
                        27 August 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        October 2010
                    

                    

                        Serikoff, N.
                        2001
                         “Image and Letter: "Pace" in Arabic Script (a Thumbnail
                            Index as a Tool for a Catalogue of Arabic Manuscripts. Principles and
                            Criteria for its Construction), ” 
                        Manuscripta Orientalia, 
                        7
                        56-66
                    

                
            
        