Keynote: Culturomics: Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized
                    Books

                    Lieberman-Aiden, Erez, 
                

                    Michel, Jean-Baptiste, 
                
Abstract

                
We constructed a corpus of digitized texts containing about 4% of all books ever
                    printed. Analysis of this corpus enables us to investigate cultural trends
                    quantitatively. We survey the vast terrain of ‘culturomics,’ focusing on
                    linguistic and cultural phenomena that were reflected in the English language
                    between 1800 and 2000. We show how this approach can provide insights about
                    fields as diverse as lexicography, the evolution of grammar, collective memory,
                    the adoption of technology, the pursuit of fame, censorship, and historical
                    epidemiology. Culturomics extends the boundaries of rigorous quantitative
                    inquiry to a wide array of new phenomena spanning the social sciences and the
                    humanities.

            
            
                
Bios

                
Erez Lieberman Aiden is a fellow at the Harvard Society of Fellows and Visiting
                    Faculty at Google. His research spans many disciplines and has won numerous
                    awards, including recognition for one of the top 20 "Biotech Breakthroughs that
                    will Change Medicine", by Popular Mechanics; the Lemelson-MIT prize for the best
                    student inventor at MIT; the American Physical Society's Award for the Best
                    Doctoral Dissertation in Biological Physics; and membership in Technology
                    Review's 2009 TR35, recognizing the top 35 innovators under 35. His last three
                    papers - two with JB Michel - have all appeared on the cover of Nature and
                    Science. 

                
Jean-Baptiste Michel is FQEB Fellow at Harvard and Visiting Faculty at Google.
                    With Erez Lieberman Aiden, he founded the Cultural Observatory at Harvard, where
                    their team develops quantitative approaches to the humanities and social
                    sciences. Jean-Baptiste is an Engineer of Ecole Polytechnique, and received an
                    MS in Applied Math and a PhD in Systems Biology from Harvard.

            
        