Poster: An Analysis of Recurrences in Harold Pinter’s Plays Using CATMA Concordancing
					Software

					Onic, Tomaz, 
					Department of English and American Studies, University of Maribor,
						Slovenia, 
					
tomaz.onic@uni-mb.si

				

				
Recurrence is a crucial feature contributing to a recognizable style of dramatic
					characters in the plays by contemporary British playwright Harold Pinter. His
					characters sometimes repeat whole phrases or sentences, sometimes with slight
					changes, which almost always indicate a change in the speaker’s intention. The
					repeated passage either follows its first appearance closely, or can be delayed
					for a few lines – or sometimes pages. In general, the most noticeable
					recurrences for the audience are those consisting of multiple repetitions,
					containing unusual words or phrases attracting our attention, or consisting of
					closely repeated passages. 


				
Beaugrande and Dressler (1988, 54) define recurrence as a
					direct repetition of a textual element which has appeared earlier in the text.
					They do not call it repetition because, according to Beaugrande (1991, 18), only
					seldom is the repetition of part of text a real repetition. Such absolute recurrence, as he calls it, would have to carry
					exactly the same meaning potential of the repeated phrase as did its first
					appearance. In most cases, that does not happen, as it is usually the very
					intention of the speaker that causes the recurrence: “Saying the same thing over
					again normally carries a context-sensitive message, such as approval,
					insistence, anxiety, doubt, surprise, or irony. /…/ thus, recurrence is
					typically an instance of ‘incremental recursion’, where the repeated event adds
					to the value of the original” (Beaugrande 1991,18).


				
A less strict variation of recurrence is partial
						recurrence, defined by Beaugrande and Dressler (1988, 54-55) as the
					re-appearance of a certain word in the form of a different part of speech. As
					such, it is similar to polyptoton, a figure of speech that is often defined as
					repetition of the same word in various inflected forms. In a later article,
					Beaugrande (1991) defines it as the repetition of a word cluster that does not
					repeat as a whole; not even all the elements need to repeat. It suffices that
					some elements of the original sentence repeat in the same or a sufficiently
					similar form.


				
Some partial recurrences (which can also originate in language system functions)
					are random; others appear as a result of the writer’s or speaker’s intention.
					Pinter’s characters can be classified into a combined category, since their
					speech – together with recurrences – is carefully designed in order to sound
					random. 


				
The role of recurrence in Pinter’s dramatic texts represents an important
					translation issue. It is vital that this stylistic feature be preserved in the
					target language as faithfully as possible, since it is not only an important
					decorative device but represents one of the key Pinter’s stylistic trademarks.
					Unfortunately, however, the existing research results have shown that this
					stylistic element is often disregarded in translation. It often comes second to
					meaning or other similar language elements, but usually its loss can be
					attributed to the translator’s lack of awareness of the importance of
					recurrence.


				
A substantial potential danger of omitting recurrence from translation is the
					fact that this is not a feature that disturbs the audience with its absence. For
					this reason, it may seem a harmless translation shift; however, it is, in fact,
					damaging to the audience’s perception of Pinter’s style, which is skewed owing
					to the absence of such an important stylistic element.


				
Having been involved in Pinter Studies for about ten years, I have conducted
					several research activities concerning recurrence in Pinter’s plays – into
					originals as well as translations – manually. Therefore, the natural next step
					was to perform selected parts of this body of analysis again using digital
					methods and thus confirm and broaden – possibly also correct – the existing
					results.


				
The first step in the project was to digitize and mark up the original texts and
					their Slovene translations. These texts were then uploaded into the new CATMA
					(Computer-Aided Textual Markup and Analysis) concordancing program. Since CATMA
					allows for searching not only by word or phrase, but also by “grade of
					similarity”, it is expected that this will be useful in attempting to identify
					those phrases which are not exact repetitions, but which are similar enough to
					be construed as a type of repetition in the reader’s mind. This will also lend
					more weight to any confirmation of the existing idea that recurrences often are
					not preserved in translation. 
Figure 1

					shows how CATMA allows searching with “grade of similarity” for phrases close to
					“like a”; when the results are shown on the screen, you can then select an item
					or not depending on whether it is similar enough to possible be what you are
					looking for. In this case you would definitely not select the first two
					examples, ie detail and Special. Since the similarity percentage requested here
					is only 60%, it is understandable that such items will be deemed as similar;
					should you raise the measure to 80%, they, and other items like them, will not
					be included in the results.


				

					

						
Fig. 1 Screen shot of the similarity function in CATMA

						
Full Size Image 

					
				

				
Hopefully, the results obtained through this research will strengthen the
					awareness of how important it is to consider this element in translation, and
					potentially contribute to a higher quality of the translation theory and
					practice in the Slovene cultural space of translated foreign language
					literature.


				
I feel that participating at the DH2011 would offer a good opportunity to discuss
					this undertaking and its practical implementation with other participants who
					have experience with similar projects, particularly in the field of drama which
					has its own specifics.


			
		
References:

			
				
					

						Beaugrande, R. de
						1991
						 “Coincidence in Translation: Glory and Misery Again, ” 
						Target, 
						3
						1
						17-53
					

					

						Beaugrande, R. de in W. U. Dressler
						1988
						Introduction to Text Linguistics, 
						Harlow
						Longman
					

					

						CATMA, 
						University of Hamburg, Germany
						
         (
link
)
   
					

					

						Pinter, H.
						1977
						Complete Works: Two, 
						New York
						Grove
					




				
			
		