Paper: Interedition: Principles, Practice and Products of an Open Collaborative Development Model for Digital Scholarly Editions

                    van Zundert, Joris , 
                    
joris.van.zundert@huygensinstituut.knaw.nl

                    Huygens ING - Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
                        Sciences, 
                

                    Middell, Gregor, 
                    
gregor.middell@uni-wuerzburg.de

                    Universität Würzburg, Lehrstuhl für
                        Computerphilologie, 
                

                    Van Hulle, Dirk , 
                    
dirk.vanhulle@ua.ac.be

                    University of Antwerp, Centre for Manuscript Genetics, 
                

                    Andrews, Tara L., 
                    
tara.andrews@arts.kuleuven.be

                    Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, dept. of Greek
                        Studies, 
                

                    Haentjens Dekker, Ronald , 
                    
ronald.dekker@huygensinstituut.knaw.nl

                    Huygens ING - Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
                        Sciences, 
                

                    Neyt, Vincent, 
                    
vincent.neyt@ua.ac.be

                    University of Antwerp, Centre for Manuscript Genetics, 
                
Short Paper Abstract

                
In October 2006 a small group of developers of tools for digital textual
                    scholarship, gathered under the leadership of the Huygens ING, concluded that
                    there was an urgent need for a more collaborative approach to digital tool
                    development in the humanities. Several problems plagued the field: high
                    duplication of effort, a shortage of quality software development, poor exchange
                    of development and methodological knowledge, institutionalized development, and
                    consequent problems of non-sustainability and obsolescence. In 2008 this
                    initiative became a formal European funded project, COST Action IS0704
                    'Interedition'. Since then, Interedition has been improving cooperation and
                    fostering interoperability in tool development for digital textual scholarship.
                       Van Zundert, J. et al.: Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for the
                        implementation of a European Concerted Research Action designated as COST
                        Action IS0704: An interoperable supranational infrastructure for digital
                        editions (Interedition). Brussels, Belgium, 2007. 
http://snipurl.com/1dl4v1
,
                        accessed 30 October 2010. This paper will reflect on the first
                    results that have emerged meanwhile.

                
We have identified four significant obstacles to the widespread use of digital
                    tools by humanities scholars. First, applicability of tools to humanities
                    research is often lacking: in many cases the tools are not tools researchers
                    need. Second, development capacity within the humanities is extremely limited
                    compared to scientific fields. Third, the sustainability of these tools, in
                    terms of their ongoing support and maintenance requirements, is historically
                    very low. Finally and perhaps most critically, tool and infrastructure
                    availability and development is highly institutionalized: scholars outside large
                    research projects or institutions often find themselves unable to take advantage
                    of the development work that might otherwise benefit them substantially.

                
The researchers and developers in the Interedition project have come up with an
                    approach to the problems of applicability, availability, and sustainability that
                    revolves around the concept of ‘microservices’. A microservice is, ideally, a
                    very small application whose functionality is available over the Web by means of
                    a lightweight protocol (e.g. REST). Microservices can be used programmatically
                    in conjunction with other such services, in multiplicative combinations, to
                    answer the individual need of any research project. Microservices share a set of
                    deceptively simple principles: they are cheap and fast to develop; cheaper and
                    easy to maintain; address very specific needs (that are shared between many
                    researchers); implement simple protocols that are easier to reuse and exchange;
                    can be combined to create larger workflows useful to the individual scholar.
                    This idea is not new: already service-based architectures such as SEASR/MEANDRE,
                    and commercial services such as Yahoo! Pipes, feature a ‘modular’ model, and
                    such architectures are increasingly considered to be the best approach for
                    software development within humanities research.Küster, M. W., Ludwig,
                        C., and Aschenbrenner, A.: 'TextGrid as a digital ecosystem', IEEE DEST
                        2007, 21.-23. Cairns, Australia, 2007. SEARS/MEANDRE: 
http://seasr.org/meandre/documentation/architecture
, accessed 30
                        October 2010; 
http://seasr.org
,
                        accessed 30 October 2010. Yahoo! Pipes: 
http://pipes.yahoo.com
, accessed 30 October 2010. However,
                    given the variety of contexts and environments in humanities research, it is
                    critical that tools not be tied to a single unifying infrastructure, which is a
                    drawback of systems such as SEASR or Yahoo! Pipes. If we are to make maximally
                    efficient use of humanities development capacity, any scholar or developer
                    should be able to contribute his or her work to other projects with a minimum of
                    effort; this means that we cannot insist upon a standardized infrastructure,
                    platform, computing language, or even data format. Moreover, there is no
                    guarantee that any such single infrastructure will be indefinitely available;
                    the infrastructure thus becomes a single point of failure.

                
Over the past two years, Interedition has been putting its theory to the test by
                    exploring effective development methods for tools for text criticism and
                    literary analysis, using the very limited resources available through the COST
                    framework. The result is a open-source development ‘collective’ cooperating in
                    ‘bootcamps’. Cooperation does not require everyone to have the same research
                    goal, nor need they agree on the 'right' way to approach textual scholarship.
                    The resulting tools are furthermore not tied to or centralized in any single
                    institution. The combined efforts of the participants become a collection of
                    microservices, varying widely in implementation language, platform, hosting
                    provision, etc., according to the resources and expertise available to the
                    individual participant. The only technical requirements placed on any
                    microservice are that it be web-accessible to other services using a REST-like
                    protocol, and that information on its input requirements and output results be
                    available via an HTTP GET request.
http://gregor.middell.net/collatex/api/collate
, accessed 30
                        October 2010 Thus, even with a wide variety of implementation
                    practice, small microservices can be built up to perform tasks in a larger
                    workflow for ‘real’ and varied research purposes.

                
Current ‘live’ microservices are open source, which is crucial both to the
                    proposed model of cooperation for research and development, to intellectual and
                    scientific transparency, and to sustainability. Many of them are hosted on free
                    cloud computing infrastructures (e.g. Google App Engine or Heroku
http://code.google.com/appengine/
, accessed 30 October 2010; 
http://heroku.com/
, accessed 30
                        October 2010.) for increased availability and reliability.

                
As a proof of principle Interedition chose to implement as a microservice
                    architecture a tool commonly wanted for textual scholarship—collation of text
                    witnesses—and worked to design a set of web-based services that could improve
                    upon existing technologies. Designing collation software for textual editors
                    that would substantially improve upon existing tools like the NINES project’s
                    JUXTAJuxta. Collation software for scholars: 
http://www.juxtasoftware.org/
, accessed 31 October 2010.
                    and Peter Robinson’s COLLATERobinson, P.: ‘Collate: A Program for
                        Interactive Collation of Large Textual Traditions’, in N. Ide and S. Hockey
                        (eds.), Research in Humanities Computing. Oxford, 1994, pp. 32–45.
                    has been a significant challenge, and one that has allowed the team to
                    thoroughly test their development model and architectural approach with an
                    important problem which, if solved, would immediately benefit a broad community
                    of scholars. The result is CollateX
http://collatex.sourceforge.net
, accessed 30 October 2010,
                    developed as a technical and methodological successor to COLLATE, which reached
                    the end of its supported life around 2007. We will describe CollateX’s
                    decentralized development within the Open Source community and how ‘bootcamps‘
                    brought together an international team of developers and domain experts for
                    requirements analysis, coordination of development efforts and collaborative
                    work on the code base. We will also explain how Interedition’s design principles
                    were implemented by splitting the collation process into functional tasks, each
                    of which can be implemented with a variety of small and well-defined software
                    services; these services are then loosely coupled to produce “the simplest
                    solution that could possibly work” for the different use cases to be addressed.
                    Three clearly separate functional tasks—input tokenization, the alignment
                    itself, and analysis or visualization of the results—were identified and
                    implemented as microservices.

                
This ‘microservice model’, as exemplified by CollateX, has another important
                    advantage: it fits well with current directions of thought on the form and
                    function of future digital scholarly editions. Rather than simple and static
                    online republication of books, it is likely that future editions will be dynamic
                    open-ended research environmentsBoot, P. and Van Zundert, J.: “The
                        Digital Edition 2.0 and The Digital Library: Services, not resources.” In:
                        Knoche, M., Mittler, E. et al. (eds): Bibliothek und Wissenschaft.
                        Wiesbaden, Germany. (Forthcoming); Robinson, P.:
                        http://computerphilologie.uni-muenchen.de/jg03/robinson.html, accessed 30
                        October 2010. composed of smaller scholarly components from many
                    different sources. It is an ultimate goal of Interedition to leverage this
                    microservice architecture to facilitate such ‘distributed editions’.

            
            
                
Poster Abstract

                
This poster presentation will demonstrate in detail the technical aspects of
                    Interedition’s ‘microservices model’ for interoperability. The poster will serve
                    as the technical annex to the short paper on Interedition and its development
                    principles, and will describe in detail the working of the various components
                    that make up CollateX, Interedition’s foremost proof-of-concept implementation.
                    At the poster presentation CollateX will be running on a laptop to demonstrate
                    its capabilities.

                
We will also showcase some digital humanities projects that are benefiting
                    already from Interedition’s approach to tool building. Examples include TILE and
                    T-PENN, both of which focus on the common task of transcribing images of text
                    and aligning this transcription with the associated regions in the image. When
                    their commonalities are examined, a similar set of core services might be
                    deduced and a robust set of modular services designed to improve upon the
                    advances these tools have already made. We will take a more in depth look at the
                    Beckett Digital Manuscript Project on which the Centre for Manuscript Genetics
                    (University of Antwerp) is collaborating with the Huygens ING. This project
                    raises the question within the framework of Interedition of how the architecture
                    of a digital archive containing modern manuscripts can be designed in such a way
                    that users can autonomously collate textual units of their choice with the help
                    of Interedition’s collation web service and thus decide for themselves how this
                    digital architecture functions – as an archive, as a genetic dossier, or as an
                    edition.

                
As a consequence of developments in digital scholarly editing, the strict
                    boundary between digital archives and electronic editions is becoming
                    increasingly permeable, resulting in a continuum rather than a dichotomy.
                    Usually, archives are distinguished from editions because the latter offer a
                    critical apparatus. Of all the interoperable tools developed within the
                    Interedition framework, the collation module has the special merit that it can
                    enable any user to transform a digital archive into an electronic edition.

                
From the vantage point of editorial theory, this development has interesting
                    consequences regarding the scholarly editor’s role, whose focus may shift from
                    the collation to a more interpretive function. In this way, the integration of a
                    collation tool may be consequential in terms of bridging the gap between genetic
                    criticism and textual scholarship. From the perspective of editorial practice,
                    the application of CollateX is still at an experimental stage, but it already
                    shows that the modular approach used by Interedition has the potential to be
                    useful both to the specialized field of digital scholarly editing and to a more
                    general audience.

            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Atkins, D. et al
                        Revolutionizing Science and Engineering Through Cyberinfrastructure:
                            Report of the National Science Foundation Blue-Ribbon Advisory Panel on
                            Cyberinfrastructure
                        2003
                        NSF
                    

                    

                        Cohen, D. et al.
                        Tools for Data-Driven Scholarship: Past, Present, Future. A Report on
                            the Workshop 22-24 October, 2008, Turf Valley Resort, Ellicott City,
                            Maryland
                        March 2009
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        European Union
                        Riding the wave. How Europe can gain from the rising tide of
                            scientific data. Final Report of the High Level Expert Group on
                            Scientific data. A submission to the European Commision
                        2010
                        Italy
                    

                    

                        Robinson, P.
                         “Electronic Editions for Everyone, ” 
                        Text and Genre in Reconstruction. Effects of Digitalization
                            on Ideas, Behaviours, Products and Institutions, 
                        Willard McCarty
                        2010
                        Cambridge, UK
                        OpenBook Publishers
                    

                
            
        