Poster: Distributed Access to Oral History collections: Fitting Access Technology to the
               Needs of Collection Owners and Researchers

               Ordelman, Roeland J.F., 
               University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands , 
               Netherlands Institutefor Sound and Vision, Hilversum, The Netherlands , 
               
ordelman@ewi.utwente.nl 

            
Introduction 


            
In contrast with the large amounts of potential interesting research material in digital multimedia repositories, the opportunities to unveil
               the gems therein are still very limited. The Oral History project ‘Verteld Verleden’
               (Dutch literal translation of Oral History) that is currently running in The
               Netherlands, focuses on improving access to spoken testimonies
               in collections, spread over many Dutch cultural heritage institutions, by deploying
               modern technology both concerning infrastructure and access. Key objective in the
               project is mapping the various specific requirements of collection owners and
               researchers regarding both publishing and access by means of current state-of-the-art
               technology. In order to demonstrate the potential, Verteld Verleden develops an Oral
               History portal that provides access to distributed collections. At the same time,
               practical step-by-step plans are provided to get to work with modern access
               technologies. In this way, a solid starting point for sustained access to Oral
               History collections can be established. 

         

         
            
Technology and Daily Practice 


            
The Verteld Verleden project builds upon years of academic research on access
               technology for spoken word archives 

                     Goldman, J.Renals, S. Bird,
                        S. de Jong, F. M. G. Federico, M.,
                        Fleischhauer, C. Kornbluh, M. Lamel,
                        L. Oard, D. W., Stewart, C.Wright,
                        R.
                     2005 “Accessing the spoken word, ” Int. Journal on Digital Libraries, 5(4)287–298
                  

                  

                     F.M.G. de Jong D.W. Oard W.F.L.
                        Heeren  R.J.F. Ordelman.
                      “Access to recorded interviews: A research agenda, ” 
                     ACM Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage
                        (JOCCH), 1(1)3-292008
                  

                  

                     R.J.F. Ordelman W.F.L. HeerenM.A.H.
                        HuijbregtsF.M.G. de Jong  D.
                        Hiemstra.
                      “Towards Affordable Disclosure of Spoken Heritage
                        Archives, ” Journal of Digital Information, 
                     M.A. Larson, K. Fernie and J. Oomen (eds)10(6)17-332009
                  
 deploying among others automatic speech recognition, text-to-speech
               synchronization and fragment-level search. This research resulted in a number of
               demonstration applications in close cooperation with cultural heritage institutes 
                  
 Radio Oranje Demonstrator (alignment of historical speeches): 
         (
link
)
   
                  

                  
Searching interviews bombarding of Rotterdam: 
         (
link
)
   
                  

                  
Access to interviews with survivors of World War II concentration camp
                     Buchenwald: 
         (
link
)
   
                  
. Although these demonstrations have been very well received both by
               the public and involved institutes, it was observed that there is still a gap between
               academic, ‘technology-driven’ pilots and the daily practice of Dutch cultural
               heritage institutions and researchers. One important observation was that Oral
               History collections are managed in many different ways: from very adequate to not at
               all. There are a few ‘forerunners’ that do already make use of various professional
               infrastructures and technologies for disclosure and access but the larger part of the
               collection owners, in spite of acknowledging the virtues of modern access
               technologies, often do not have the knowledge or means to really start using these.
               In practice, access to Oral History collections in general is very limited and
               publically accessible overviews on available collections are missing. On the other
               hand, we see that collection owners and researchers have very specific requirements
               with regard to management, disclosure and access, and have very detailed knowledge of
               their collections and their contexts. 
         

         
            
Knowledge Transfer


            
In order to be able to catch up with the advantages of the digital networked society,
               cultural heritage institutes need practical handles that are specifically geared
               towards their specific use cases. The Verteld Verleden project follows this practical
               approach by mapping the available solutions and best practices in The Netherlands on
               a diversity of relevant topics ranging from digitization of audio-visual data, format
               conversion, online access to collections, and (semi)automatic metadata generation,
               and linking collections to other information sources, to dealing with
               privacy/copyright issues. On an academic level, special attention is addressed
               towards transfer of knowledge and awareness on methodology and theory of Oral History
               research, and the design of Oral History research in combination with modern
               technology. 


         

         
            
Showcase 


            
To showcase how these best-practices and solutions could work out in practice the
               project builds an embeddable Oral History portal that enables access to distributed
               oral history collections. The general approach is that collections owners are urged
               to comply with interoperability standards on the dissemination of metadata and
               content. By adopting these standards, content owners allow aggregators to channel
               content into local portals (e.g., Verteld Verleden) or even international portals
               such as the Europeana portal 
 Europeana portal: 
         (
link
)
   
                  
. The Verteld Verleden portal serves here as a so called thematic
               portal. 

            
Verteld Verleden promotes OAI-PMH, the Protocol for Metadata Harvesting and
               stimulates content owners to have their content available using a streaming media
               protocol to enable play-out of search results. The Verteld Verleden portal harvests
               metadata from associated institutes and provides centralized search for searching and
               browsing the collections that are linked up. As the portal’s user interface can also
               be embedded in the local websites, content owners can be provided with search
               functionality for their own content. 

         

         
            
State-of-the-art


            
The portal is equipped with state-of-the-art search technology and a flexible user
               interface that allows the project to adapt it easily to the requirements of
               researchers and content owners that are expected to advance during the project as a
               result of discussions at workshops and local expert sessions. An important
               requirement of researchers is evidently to have sophisticated means to access and
               analyse available Oral History collections. To a large extent however, access to
               collections is rather limited due to the lack of appropriate fragment-level semantic descriptions. Metadata is often only sparsely
               available, forcing scholars to play an A/V item in full in order to decide if, and if
               so, which parts of the material are of interest for their research. Moreover,
               exploring possible correlations and connections both within and across large data collections requires an additional
               layer on top of the metadata for the interlinking of multimedia content sources
               and/or collection fragments. Ultimately, also dedicated technology for browsing, accessing, analysing and comparing sources
               effectively during the various phases of research (exploration, analysis,
               publication, verification) are a prerequisite for the innovation of the
               methodological framework of humanities researchers and for the formulation of new
               questions and the renewal of research agendas. In order to successfully exploit these
               technologies for the purpose of humanities research, their development must strongly
               be steered by the demands and requisites of the researchers and their research
               paradigms. 

         

         
            
Speech Recognition 


            
A special role in the project is assigned to the use of speech recognition
               technology. Speech recognition can play an important role in the process of making
               Oral History content better accessible, either directly via the conversion of speech
               to text or indirectly using available textual transcripts and a technology derived
               from speech recognition often referred to as forced-alignment. Verteld Verleden
               offers associated content owners the use of a speech recognition service supported by
               the Dutch CATCHPlus program 
OAI-PMH: 
         (
link
)
   
                  
, that aims to valorise scientific research results to usable tools
               and services for the Entire Dutch heritage sector. 

            
Deploying speech recognition brings up an additional challenge with regard to
               metadata models and harvesting standards: it encompasses the need to incorporate
               time-labelled into the metadata model. Approaches are currently investigated in close
               collaboration with CLARIN-NL, a project on Common Language Resources and Technology
               Infrastructure 
 CLARIN-NL: 
         (
link
)
   
                  

         
      
References:

         
            

               
Verteld Verleden homepage: , 
         (
link
)
   
               


               
CATCHPlus program, 
                  
         (
link
)
   
               

            
         
      