Poster: Adapting EATS for Crowdsourcing: Register Medicorum Medii Aevi

                    Viglianti, Raffaele, 
                    King's College London, United Kingdom, 
                    
raffaele.viglianti@kcl.ac.uk

                
The Register Medicorum Medii Aevi (RMMA) is an active pilot project at King's
                    College London that seeks to lay the foundations for an interdisciplinary online
                    register of doctors in the middle ages. It is common for similar kinds of
                    historical online resources to prepare a database out of a large collection of
                    scholarly findings. RMMA, instead, aims to create a growing database which is
                    populated over time by various scholars and students to make their findings
                    accessible on the web. In order to pursue this task, the prototype for this
                    pilot must allow data insertion from a wider group than the project partners
                    alone; therefore several crowdsourcing principles are applied and extensive user
                    testing is being undertaken. This poster will show solutions to the main
                    challenges encountered in the design of the database and in adapting EATS, a
                    Django application for authority records, for wider online use.

            
            
                
Overview

                
Researchers from different areas of medieval studies are likely to encounter
                    information in primary sources about medici, the
                    physicians of the time. Information about medici and
                    their practices was recorded in a variety of documents; they would often travel
                    across cultures, which can serve as indication of their high value. This has
                    produced many sources from different cultures and in different languages.
                    Because different areas of study often gravitate around geographical, cultural
                    and linguistic divisions, it is challenging to investigate the movements of
                    people and knowledge across these barriers. RMMA explores how digital
                    publication can help in exchanging reliable information between researchers in
                    such areas and currently involves experts on Anglo-Saxon, Arabic, Armenian,
                    Greek, Jewish, Latin materials that provide information about doctors, and
                    medical knowledge in the medieval period.


                
To address this issue, the project is developing a web application that will
                    allow to (1) insert information about medici from primary and secondary sources;
                    (2) handle different opinions about the same individuals; and (3) connect to
                    prosopographical projects that deal with a similar historical time-frame and
                    with historical geographical resources. RMMA is looking in particular at
                        prosopographical projects developed at the Centre for Computing in the
                        Humanities at King’s College London, including the Prosopography of the
                        Byzantine Empire and Prosopography of the Byzantine World 
<http://www.pbw.kcl.ac.uk/>
. For historical locations, we
                        are working towards integrating a query system to Pleiades when entering new
                        locations 
<http://pleiades.stoa.org/>.


            
            
                
Technologies Involved


                
The application is built using Django,
http://www.djangoproject.com/
 a Python open source web
                    application framework aimed at simplifying development through a reusable set of
                    common libraries and components. Developers can code their own application to be
                    re-used within other Django frameworks, which is a factor that contributes
                    towards the web framework's success. EATS (Entity Authority Tool Set) is a
                    Django application developed by Jamie Norrish at the New Zealand Electronic Text
                    Centre (NZETC) and "is now used to manage the 30,000+ entities represented in
                    the NZETC online collection of significant New Zealand and Pacific Island texts"
                    (Norrish 2007). The application targets issues usually faced by libraries, such
                    as ambiguous identifiers based on names and titles. By improving on traditional
                    authority systems where one identifier groups different entries describing the
                    same entity, EATS allows the linking together of different collections and
                    authorities, introduces user management and provides greater scope for
                    disambiguation. RMMA found that EATS's approach could greatly contribute to the
                    objectives of the project's web application, specifically in handling
                    information about the same entities coming from multiple sources.


                
Most EATS top-level components have been adapted for RMMA's purposes: Entities
                    are database tables that must be associated to one or more Authorities.
                    Authorities may then make Property Assertions that associate Entities to
                    specific default or user-defined properties. In RMMA, Entities are medici,
                    patients, employers, locations, institutions, etc., while Authorities are the
                    contributors of the data, such as authors of narrative secondary sources or
                    contributors inserting information anew from a primary source (note that in this
                    case the authority remains the contributor and not the primary source; in
                    theory, different contributors can enter different information from the same
                    primary source, intentionally leaving room for debate). Property Assertions in
                    RMMA reflect statements such as: Authority contributor
                    states that Entity medicus has name name, or similar. Finally, users of the system are able to insert data
                    for one or more authorities, which is particularly useful if one user is
                    entering information from a number of secondary sources. When users enter data
                    discovered by themselves, however, they are acting like authorities. Even in
                    this case, for the purpose of the system, the dichotomy between user and
                    authority must be maintained: the scholar will insert data as a certain user
                    controlling the authority that represents him or herself.


                

                    

                        
Fig 1. This graph shows the role of users in controlling authorities
                            and different authorities declaring statements (property assertions)
                            about the same entity.

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                

            


            
                
Adapting EATS Interface for a Wider Audience

                
The default EATS interface for data entry is designed for completeness and may
                    require some training for the inexperienced users. After all, this interface is
                    likely to be used by personnel for populating the database and most of the
                    design effort is better spent on the querying interface that end users will see.
                    In the case of RMMA the project is vastly adapting the interface, as data entry
                    will be an essential part of the end user experience. The project has been
                    looking at other initiatives in the Digital Humanities and Digital Library
                    fields that are adopting crowdsourcing for collecting data.See in
                        particular: Transcribe Bentham, a crowsourcing project hosted at the Centre
                        for Digital Humanities, University College London 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham>
; the image
                        collection of the Victoria & Albert Museum 
<http://collections.vam.ac.uk/crowdsourcing>
; and other
                        projects discussed in Holley 2010. Crowdsourcing consists of
                    outsourcing specific tasks to be performed by volunteers via a web application.
                    The term is a neologism coined in 2006 in an article on Wired, in which the
                    author claims that the current pervasiveness of technology has reduced the gap
                    between professionals and amateurs. Rose Holley (2010) argues that crowdsourcing
                    could be of great value for Digital Libraries, especially for accomplishing
                    goals that would require a large number of staff, time and resources. In order
                    to attract contributions from volunteers it is necessary to follow certain
                    principles when designing the web application that they will use. Holley
                    outlines some "tips for crowdsourcing" out of her personal experience and by
                    analysing successful projects.


                
RMMA is not strictly a crowdsourcing project, as submissions will be reviewed by
                    a board before being published. The reason for this is twofold: on one hand it
                    is desirable to control what gets into the database, though successful
                    crowdsourcing initiatives usually found volunteers good at policing each other
                    and keeping away malicious users; on the other hand, RMMA attempts to promote
                    the use of the database as a publishing environment for scholars. The presence
                    of a board, therefore, offers a model closer to peer-reviewed publishing, which
                    is not a novel approach, as some academic projects have already been
                    experimenting along similar lines.An exemplary project is Suda on Line:
                        Byzantine Lexicography (SOL) 
<http://www.stoa.org/sol>
, which involves
                        more than a hundred scholars for the translation and editing of the Suda, a 10th century CE Byzantine encyclopedia. The
                        large size of Suda (30,000+ entries) has encouraged
                        the involvement of a large number of collaborators to work online.
                        Submissions to the database are made immediately available to the public,
                        but SOL implements a colour code that differentiate just submitted entries
                        and entries that have been reviewed and approved by a the editors overtime.
                        This mixed system simplifies submission whilst allowing a control of the
                        quality of the publication.


                
Despite these plans, which move RMMA away from the definition of crowdsourcing,
                    many of the principles outlined by Holley are of great importance. Specifically,
                    she suggests having a clear and ambitious goal, acknowledging contributors,
                    reporting on the progress of the resource and making the application easy,
                    reliable, quick and intuitive. Current efforts focus on improving the
                    application by simplifying the interface and making clear paths for data entry
                    depending on the nature of information that the users intend to store. To insure
                    that the interface design is effective, several stages of user testing are
                        planned.As recommended by many studies on User Centred Design, after
                        Norman 1988. RMMA is organising a number of workshops in Europe and
                    in the United States as part of the pilot project. This is intended to reach the
                    desired audience and at the same time have the user test the resource and
                    collect feedback during the following few weeks.

            
            
                
The Future

                
RMMA hopes to use its web application to involve middle ages medical researchers
                    from different fields separated by specific geographical and linguistic studies.
                    The database aims to be both a growing collection compiled by interested
                    participants and a reliable publication of information about relevant
                    individuals from the middle age worlds. It is therefore necessary to include
                    crowdsourcing principles in the design of the web application to achieve the
                    proposed goals. While not a stated aim of the project, the possibility of
                    tracing of the movement across cultures of individuals conveying and acquiring
                    medical knowledge would be a desirable and likely outcome of far-reaching
                    historical interest.

            











        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Finkel, R. et al.
                        2007
                        The Suda On Line, 
                        31 November 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Holley, R.
                        2010
                         “Crowdsourcing: How and Why Should Libraries Do It?, ” 
                        D-Lib Magazine, 
                        16
                        3/4
                    

                    

                        Norman, Donald A.
                        1988
                        The design of everyday things, 
                        MIT Press
                        Cambridge (MA, USA)
                    

                    

                        Norrish, J.
                        2007
                         “EATS: an Entity Authority Tool Set, ” 
                        Australia New Zealand Digital
                            Encyclopedias Group Meeting, 
                        Sydney, Australia, 
                        7-8 December
                    

                    

                        Norrish, J. and Stevenson, A.
                        2008
                         “Topic Maps and Entity Authority Records: an Effective Cyber
                            Infrastructure for Digital Humanities, ” 
                        Digital Humanities 2008, 
                        Oulu Finland, 
                        25-29 June
                    

                    

                        Terras, M.
                        2010
                         “Crowdsourcing Cultural Heritage: UCL’s Transcribe Bentham
                            Project, ” 
                        Seeing Is Believing: New Technologies
                            For Cultural Heritage, 
                        International Society for Knowledge Organization.
                            University College London, London, 
                        9 June 2010
                    

                
            
        