Poster: Visualizing Sound as Functional N-Grams in Homeric Greek Poetry

                    Forstall, Christopher, 
                    State University of New York at Buffalo, 
                    
forstall@buffalo.edu

                

                    Scheirer, Walter J., 
                    University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, 
                    
wjs3@vast.uccs.edu

                
 The question of the stylistic integrity of Homer's corpus is a venerable one.
                    For centuries, diverse models, subjective as well as quantitative, have claimed
                    to explain the composition of the Iliad and Odyssey: some scholars have seen the poems as the work of
                    a single, literate genius (
West, 2001, 3
); others as
                    a collective multitext, the superposition of generations of continually-changing
                    performances handed down from one illiterate bard to the next (
Nagy, 1996, 107ff.
). Often much of the support for
                    these claims is the perceived homo- or heterogeneity of the text. What is at
                    stake in these examinations is larger than a nineteenth-century romantic notion
                    of the artist and his genius; recent studies have used the structure of the
                    ancient Greek epics to examine how cognition structures spoken poetry, and how
                    the sounds of poetry in turn give structure to our thought (
Peabody, 1975, 168ff.
). A connection between
                    low-level phonetic patterns and larger-scale poetics is not unique to oral
                    composition, but has been shown to be equally active in literate authors as well
                        (
Brierley and Atwell, 2010
). 

                
 The work in progress presented here attempts to examine internal heterogeneity
                    in Homer's language using the tools of computer-based authorship analysis. As
                    stylometric tools become finer-grained, scholars such as Hoover (
2007
) and Andreev (
2010
) have turned their gaze from the characterization of an author
                    or corpus as a whole to considerations of an author's stylistic evolution over
                    time, and the differences between and even within individual works. Previously,
                    the authors of this poster have used character- and word-level functional
                    n-grams to compare Homer's two epic poems to one another and to later written
                    text (
Forstall and Scheirer, 2010a
). We have
                    also adapted the functional n-gram to metrical data (
Forstall, Jacobson and Scheirer, 2010
). In the present research, we
                    attempt to characterize the internal sound structure of Homer's epics using
                    functional n-grams at the word, character and metrical levels. 

                
 We ask, 
                        
How homogeneous is the author signal within a large work?

                        
Do the areas frequently identified as later additions stand
                            out?

                        
Can internal patterns help us understand a poem's composition?

                    
                
                
 While statistical studies of Homer have been made before, it is often difficult
                    for the critic to move comfortably between the numbers and the subjective
                    experience of interpreting poetry. David W. Packard, in pioneering computational
                    work on sound patterns in Homer, cautioned that "we cannot expect to
                    identify expressive passages merely by counting letters" (
Packard, 1974
). More recently, Marjorie Perloff,
                    noting that the significance of sound is all too often overlooked in poetry
                    criticism, has laid part of the blame on "'scientific' prosodic
                    analysis," which 
                        
has relied on an empiricist model that allows for little generalization
                            about poetic modes and values: the more thorough the description of a
                            given poem's rhythmic metrical units, its repetition of vowels and
                            consonants, its pitch contours, the less we may be able to discern the
                            larger contours of a given poet's particular practice, much less a
                            period style or cultural construct.

                        
(
Perloff and Dworkin, 2009, 2
)

                     In this poster we focus on visualizing the data in ways that bridge the
                    gap between empirical data and the subjective experience of interpreting poetry.
                    We take our inspiration from work such as that of Plamondon (
2009
) and the online Poetess
                        Archive, which has shown that innovation in how we visualize data is
                    vital to connecting computing with humanities scholarship. In particular, 
Plamondon
 used color to represent multi-parameter
                    sound data over individual poems, allowing a subjective appreciation of the
                    poem's structure based on objective values at a glance. 
                
 We divide the poem into samples of various sizes, and calculate n-gram
                    frequencies for the most common features. We then use principal components
                    analysis to concentrate the variance among fewer variables. The top three
                    principal components are assigned to three component color channels: red = PC1,
                    green = PC2, blue = PC3. Each sample is visualized as a color which
                    simultaneously represents three parameters, each potentially comprehending the
                    most important aspects of a much larger feature set. The flow of sound in the
                    poem may be seen as a gradient with local and large-scale variation (see Figure
                    1). As a control, we also treat a text of Homer's poetry in which the order of
                    the lines has been randomized. This is in part a response to the sobering
                    results shown by Eder (
2010
), who made a strong case
                    that authorship analysis was unreliable at samples fewer than several thousand
                    words, and was improved with randomization in sampling. It may be that smaller
                    samples are less reliable at the author level precisely because they are
                    sensitive to internal patterns in the text, which the randomization should
                    smooth over. 

                
 The color gradient produced by this visualization of PCA is useful to the
                    classical philologist precisely because of its subjective quality; yet a more
                    definitive analysis of the epics' internal heterogeneity is also desirable.
                    Which sections are the "most different"? Are units which are
                    functionally related, for example the type scenes which are played out over and
                    over by different characters (
Lord, 2000, 68 ff.
),
                    more consistent than the poem as a whole? Is the difference between the Iliad and Odyssey greater than the
                    variation within each poem? In addressing such questions, the classicist cannot
                    help but be biased: certain features, certain passages take on prominence at the
                    expense of others. Here we turn to unsupervised classification for an answer
                    which encompasses all of the text at once, and has no literary bias. Using the
                    same features as for PCA, we now perform k-means classification for various
                    numbers of categories; again, the randomized text is used as a control. In
                    forcing the algorithm to subdivide our sample set into an arbitrary number of
                    classes, we make no specific assumptions about the structure of the poem.
                    Instead we ask, how is variation distributed within the text? For example, with
                    only two or three classes, we find that samples from all are relatively evenly
                    distributed within and between the two poems. With more classes, we find that
                    some tend to be found more in one poem or the other in the ordered version of
                    the text, while in the randomized text samples from all classes are found
                    throughout. The computer-assigned, discrete classifications may be arbitrarily
                    assigned to colors, which are then displayed alongside the continuously varying
                    PCA data to contrast the more subjective, human-interpreted view of the poem's
                    heterogeneity with the entirely objective computer-based analysis. 

            
            
                

                    

                        
Figure 1

                        
Full Size Image 

                        
 The entirety of the Iliad and Odyssey, in 35-line samples. The
                            color of each sample represents the values of the first three principal
                            components of a larger feature set composed of character bi-gram
                            frequencies. 

                    
                
            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Andreev, V. S.
                        2009
                         “Patterns in Style Evolution of Poets, ” 
                        Digital Humanities 2009, 
                        University of Maryland, 
                        June, 2009
                        52–53
                    

                    

                        Brierley, C.
                        Atwell, E.
                        2010
                         “Holy Smoke: Vocalic Precursors of Phrase Breaks in Milton's
                                Paradise Lost, ” 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        25(2)
                        137–151
                    

                    

                        Eder, M.
                        2010
                         “Does Size Matter? Authorship Attribution, Small Samples,
                            Big Problem, ” 
                        Digital Humanities 2010, 
                        King's College London, 
                        July 2010
                        132–133
                    

                    

                        Forstall, C. W.
                        Scheirer, W. J.
                        2010
                         “Features From Frequency: Authorship and Stylistic Analysis
                            Using Repetitive Sound, ” 
                        Proceedings of the Chicago Colloquium on
                            Digital Humanities and Computer Science, 
                        1(2)
                    

                    

                        Forstall, C. W.
                        Jacobson, S. J.
                        Scheirer, W. J.
                        2010
                         “Evidence of Intertextuality: Investigating Paul the
                            Deacon's Angustae Vitae, ” 
                        Digital Humanities 2010, 
                        King's College London, 
                        July 2010
                        294–295
                    

                    

                        Hoover, D. L.
                        2007
                         “Corpus Stylistics, Stylometry, and the Styles of Henry
                            James, ” 
                        Style, 
                        41(2)
                        160–189
                    

                    

                        Lord, A. B.
                        2000
                        The Singer of Tales, 
                        Harvard University Press
                        Cambridge, MA
                    

                    

                        Nagy, G.
                        1996
                        Poetry as Performance: Homer and Beyond, 
                        Cambridge University Press
                        Cambridge, UK
                    

                    

                        Packard, D. W.
                        1974
                         “Sound Patterns in Homer, ” 
                        Transactions of the American Philological
                            Association, 
                        104
                        239–260
                    

                    

                        Peabody, B.
                        1975
                        The Winged Word: A Study in the Technique of Ancient Greek
                            Oral Composition as Seen Principally Through Hesiod's "Works and
                            Days", 
                        State University of New York Press
                        Albany, NY
                    

                    

                        Perloff, M.
                        Dworkin, C.
                        2009
                        The Sound of Poetry, the Poetry of Sound, 
                        University of Chicago Press
                        Chicago, IL
                    

                    

                        Plamondon, M.
                        2009
                         “Computational Phonostylistics: Computing the Sounds of
                            Poetry, ” 
                        Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities
                            and Computer Science, 
                        Illinois Institute of Technology, 
                        November 2009
                    

                    

                        The Poetess Archive, 
                        Mandell, L.
                        09/14/2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        West, M. L.
                        2001
                        Studies in the Text and Transmission of the Iliad, 
                        K. G. Saur
                        Munich
                    

                
            
        