
                
It is commonplace to separate the methods of preservation of our cultural
                    heritage from scholarly interpretation. Preservation is often described in more
                    technical terms, while scholarship is deemed an intellectual engagement removed
                    from the the technicalities of electronic capture and persistence. This
                    presentation challenges that distinction, and rather explores the dynamic,
                    causal relationship between preserving a performance event and its subsequent
                    interpretation.


                
The scholar's reception and elucidation of performance can be traced back at
                    least to Aristarchus and his collation and annotation of the various written
                    records of recitations of Homer's epic poetry that had accumulated by the
                    second century B.C.E. More recently, the digitization of the Bayeux Tapestry
                    illuminates the interplay between the translation, from one medium to another,
                    and preservation of a fundamentally important object of human expression and its
                    determining influence on how that object may be interpreted and received
                    subsequent to its digitization.


                
Today, performance often entails rich, multimedia elements that pose considerable
                    difficulties for preserving the event and making it accessible over time. As
                    importantly, the methods of capture can limit but also allow new and exciting
                    opportunities for scholarly exegesis, including the capture of various stages
                    and components of the creative process, illuminating the context and history of
                    the performance 'event'.


                
What does it mean to preserve our cultural record digitally? What new methods of
                    interpretation may arise in response to a digital record of an otherwise
                    fleeting and ephemeral event? What new means of publication will be needed to
                    communicate adequately the various 'readings' of a digitally preserved
                    performance?

            

        
    