
                
Humanities computing in the United States can be considered to have started a few
                    years before 1964, when IBM sponsored what it designated as a Literary Data
                    Processing Conference. While most of the participants in that early conference,
                    despite their often-expressed interest in the concept of nonlinear visualization
                    of texts, were clearly oriented toward the goal of producing a printed book, two
                    generations after that founding conference, we can recognize that the value of
                    their work lies in their having begun to establish humanities computing as a
                    valid occupation of scholars. There was, nevertheless, a need for a common
                    ground on which to record and exchange our ideas of where this new mode of
                    scholarship was leading us; hence the print journal 
Computers
                        and the Humanities
.
 
Not evident to that handful of pioneers in 1964 was
                    the amazing growth of computer applications throughout society that were made
                    possible by the technological advances of the next half-century. Humanities
                    computing has advanced as far as it has almost exclusively because of the
                    revolution on the technological side. Because of the computer revolution, the
                    world we inhabit is no more like the one known to previous generations than that
                    of the twentieth century resembled any of its predecessors.
 
The drastic changes
                    in our world in the almost half-century since 1964 makes clear that we can no
                    more predict the changes to come than those pioneers did in their own time.
                    Computer-based communication, in particular and especially in its printed form,
                    is being violently altered by the new technology. The openness of the Internet
                    and the Web being a manifestation of a democratic spirit, the burgeoning role of
                    computers in education, including humanities education, can only continue to
                    disrupt the traditional structure of academe. 
 
The long-term consequences of the
                    increasing cost of a postsecondary education and the increasing availability of
                    resources that exceed those of any university would seem to drive toward the
                    replacement of the bricks-and-mortar university by a totally online facility.
                    That paradigm shift requires the aggregation in a central online location of
                    information about the growing resources of the digital humanities. The
                    generation that will prevail in the middle of the twenty-first century, wired to
                    computers for all their needs, social as well as intellectual, will look beyond
                    our current concepts of humanities. How well we prepare for that world, what
                    foundation we construct to emphasize the positive potentials of whatever
                    technology will have evolved, will be the measure of how much we have learned
                    from our humanistic concern for our own history.

            

        
    