
                Vanishing Point(s)
                
Vanishing Point(s)
 is a site-specific art installation
                    by Michael Takeo Magruder and Dr. Hugh Denard that explores creative collisions
                    and collaborative possibilities between contemporary art discourse and
                    humanities research. Commissioned for Digital Humanities 2010 for the Great Hall
                    of the Grade I listed King’s Building created in 1831 by English architect Sir
                    Robert Smirke (1781 - 1867), the project conjoins Takeo’s long-standing use of
                    computational processes and virtual environments as frameworks for artistic
                    expression and Denard’s studies of the playfully illusionistic and fantastical
                    worlds of Roman fresco art.


                
Vanishing Point(s)
 takes as its inspiration the
                    astonishingly complex and beautiful ways in which Roman architecture and
                    painting often converged, immersing the viewer in imagined spaces – idealised
                    cities and gardens, palaces and shrines, theatres and basilicas – and
                    beguilingly interweaving physical architecture with painted views so that it is
                    not always easy to discern fact from fantasy; these are indeed
                    "virtual" worlds that speak to the digitally-generated virtual worlds
                    of the Avatar Age. The creators have drawn deeply upon the conceptual and
                    compositional principles of theatrically-inspired Roman frescoes to form
                    structured vistas in the online synthetic realm of Second Life as the visual
                    source material for a new work that evokes the spatial-pictorial tradition of
                    medieval stained glass.


                
Through processes of reimagining and reconstructing, 
Vanishing Point(s)
 invites ancient and medieval principles of spatial
                    and pictorial representation to speak to this present age of data networks,
                    mixed-realities and multimodal existence.

                
                
Michael Takeo Magruder
 (b.1974,
                    US/UK) BSc (University of Virginia) is an artist and researcher based in King’s
                    Visualisation Lab, King’s College London. His creative practice extends
                    traditional modes of artistic production through the use of emerging media
                    including high-performance computing, mobile devices and virtual environments,
                    blending Information Age technologies and aesthetics to explore the networked,
                    digital world. His work has been showcased in over 200 exhibitions in 30
                    countries, including Manifesta 8: European Biennial of Contemporary Art, Murcia;
                    the Courtauld Institute of Art, London; EAST International 2005, Norwich;
                    Georges Pompidou Center, Paris; Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of Photography, Japan;
                    and Trans-Media-Akademie, Hellerau. His artistic practice has been funded by the
                    Esmée Fairbairn Foundation, the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Arts
                    Council England and The National Endowment for the Arts, USA, and he has been
                    commissioned by numerous public galleries in the UK and abroad and by the
                    leading Internet Art portal 
Turbulence.org
.


                
Dr. Hugh Denard
 (b.1970, IE) BA (Dublin), MA, PhD (Exeter)
                    is Associate Director of King’s Visualisation Lab in the Centre for Computing in
                    the Humanities, King’s College London, where he convenes the MA in Digital
                    Culture and Technology. He is a specialist in ancient Greek, Roman and
                    twentieth-century Irish theatre history and in the application of digital
                    visualisation methodologies in the humanities. He proposed and edits the
                    internationally-recognised 
London Charter for the
                        Computer-based Visualisation of Cultural Heritage
 and has jointly
                    directed numerous projects funded by the AHRC, Arts Council England, British
                    Council-Italian Ministry of Research, Eduserv Foundation, JISC, Leverhulme Trust
                    and the Metropolitan Museum of Art. In Second Life, he co-directed the Theatron
                    3 project, collaborates with artist Michael Takeo Magruder, curates Digital
                    Humanities Island, and teaches postgraduate modules on applied visualisation in
                    the arts, humanities and cultural heritage. 

                
(top) Work-in-progress study for 
Vanishing
                            Point(s)
, 2010.
 (bottom) Visual reconstruction of the Villa of
                        Olpontis, 
oecus
 Room 15, east wall fresco by Martin
                        Blazeby, KVL, 2010. 
                    

            

                Communion
                
Communion
 is new media art installation by Michael
                    Takeo Magruder that reflects upon aesthetic and informational qualities of
                    language within today’s technologically-enabled and multicultural society. The
                    artwork is created exclusively from sampled 'front-pages' of the
                    BBC's online international news service, digitally recorded at a finite
                    moment in time. Each of the composition's forty distinct elements
                    correlates to a different language edition of the BBC website. The captured
                    web-pages have been algorithmically processed through a single, predefined
                    sequence of instructions. The resulting images are visually reminiscent of
                    traditional stained-glass windows and Rorschach inkblots, and through such
                    spiritual and psychological references, notions of the transcendental and
                    mechanisms for emotional response are introduced. The visual structures are only
                    semi-abstract and even though the media itself provides the aesthetic essence of
                    the work, the language – and information it contains – is still partially
                    discernible.


                
Originally commissioned in 2005 by Arts Council England for the forty
                    leaded-glass windows in the main gallery space of 20-21 Visual Arts Centre,
                    North Lincolnshire, 
Communion
 will be reworked as a
                    series of wall-mounted prints for Digital Humanities 2010.

                
Installation view of 
Communion
 at 20-21 Visual
                        Arts Centre, UK, 2005.
                    
Detailed view of 
Communion
 (Spanish),
                        2005.
                    

        
    