
                Aims of the Project
                
The National Digital Library is one of the research, innovation, and creativity
                    environments developed under the strategic policies of the Ministry of Education
                    of Finland. It implements national culture and science policies by increasing
                    the availability of the digital resources of libraries, archives and museums, by
                    developing their long-term preservation, by establishing an important research
                    infrastructure, and by strengthening virtual learning environments. 

                
The National Digital Library project is also the Finnish response to the joint
                    objectives of the European Union Member States on digitisation of cultural
                    materials and scientific information, and their electronic availability and
                    long-term preservation. The National Digital Library will serve as the Finnish
                    aggregator for Europeana. 

                
The project has four main goals: 
to build one national access point, a public interface, to digital
                            resources of libraries, archives and museums (operational in
                            2011)
to digitise and make available the most essential collections of
                            Finnish cultural heritage organisations through the public
                            interface
to create sustainable solution for long-term preservation of digital
                            cultural material (finalised plan in 2010)
to boost national competence in the area of digitisation, online
                            availability and accessibility and long-term preservation.

                

                    
Figure 1
                        
Enterprise architecture of the National Digital Library

                
A total of 35 organisations participate in the project: ministries, national
                    institutions in charge of recording and preserving cultural heritage, scientific
                    and public libraries, archives, museums, universities, research institutes,
                    academic associations, and representatives from other key interest groups.

                
The formation of consensus and a new enthusiasm for co-operation between sectors
                    has been the key issue in an undertaking of this magnitude. On project level
                    this has been achieved by cross-sectoral expert groups, using shared tools for
                    project management, interaction and development, and learning from each
                    others' practices. The central funding from the ministry has been the
                    corner stone of this national project. The common standards defined during the
                    project, operational public interface, and projected implementation of the
                    long-term preservation solution should ensure the continuation of the
                    co-operation within the Finnish memory organisation sector after the project is
                    completed.

            

            

                Functional principle of the Public Interface
                
The born-digital and digitised resources on cultural heritage, research, and
                    teaching in Finland will be accessible to end-users through a single interface
                    of integrated services and resources called the Public Interface. The Public
                    Interface will be the primary access point to the resources held by libraries,
                    museums, archives and other information suppliers in Finland. The national view
                    (e.g. the national instance of the Public Interface) will be supplemented with,
                    for example, customised sectoral or institutional views.

                
The operational principle is to continue cataloguing data and keep the digital
                    objects in the back-end systems. Metadata will be automatically harvested to the
                    Public Interface and normalised and indexed for easy and fast retrieval.
                    Harvesting and services will be integrated to the Public Interface through
                    standardised interfaces and access to the digital objects will be provided by
                    persistent links.

                
The systems architecture of the public interface separates the user interface
                    from the back-end systems of organisations. This will facilitate customer
                    oriented services development since more resources can be focused on user
                    interface, services development, and integration.

                
The end-users' needs and expectations have played a major role during the
                    project. Information retrieval systems currently in use are often challenging to
                    use, and some of them require user training before information retrieval is
                    possible. Much of the development work is based on experience gained from
                    research on systems currently in production. The aim is to use the gained
                    experience to develop a comprehensive and multifaceted service with high
                    usability and fast information retrieval functionality available 24/7 anywhere.
                    The system provides functionality for the end user to personalise the user
                    interface to suit his/her needs.

            

            

                Resources and Metadata
                
Contents of the Public Interface will be digitised or born-digital objects
                    (images, texts, sound files, video clips, e-publications), reference data on
                    physical objects (e.g. artefacts, books, works of art, geographical locations),
                    or other reference data stored in databases.

                
The Public Interface will provide unrestricted material for all users. It will
                    also provide restricted access materials subject to user authentication, such as
                    licensed materials (e.g. e-journals), archive materials with restricted viewing
                    and use, legal deposit copies, and other materials subject to copyright.

                
Since there are several content providers from various sectors, the metadata
                    available will be very heterogenous. This metadata will be harvested from
                    several different back-end systems to a centralised index of the Public
                    Interface. The metadata will be normalised to a common internal format. This
                    means that the Public Interface will accept any type of metadata, as long as the
                    providing organisations have implemented standardised interfaces for
                    harvesting.

            

            

                Users and Usability
                
One of the major challenges of the project is usability. The success of the
                    service depends greatly on its ability to meet the user expectations, which have
                    been outlined in the requirement specifications. Usability considerations focus
                    mostly on the user interface and its functionalities, which should expose the
                    digital content and services within the system and enhance their value.
                    Furthermore, with effective user studies it will also be possible to identify
                    potential future stakeholders and their needs.

                
The project has assigned a considerable amount of resources to user studies and
                    usability design. The Usability Plan, which was realised in autumn 2009,
                    includes five sections: 
Usability principles
; By following the
                            discourse on the field of HCI as well as the accomplishments of
                            comparable projects, the usability principles for the National Digital
                            Library will be established.
Pre-design evaluation
; Primary target groups,
                            their roles as service users, and expectations will be described in
                            detail. Particularly, users with vague information needs will be
                            examined. Central use cases and projected information retrieval
                            scenarios will be modelled. The service concept will also be tested
                            among selected target groups.
Usability evaluation
; Formal usability
                            evaluations will be conducted: one during the piloting phase of the
                            system, and another once the system has been deployed. All evaluations
                            will comprise of a usability analysis and testing of the user
                            interfaces.
Tracking and evaluating actual use
; In order to
                            provide systematic data for analysing the actual use, usage logs will be
                            collected and recurrent user studies conducted. On-line communities of
                            National Digital Library users will be traced, monitored, or
                            founded.
User interface design
; The project will employ
                            a professional usability engineer for realisation of approved usability
                            design principles, who will participate in all above mentioned usability
                            design phases.

                
The results of these phases will guide the design and implementation of the
                    Public Interface. In addition, they will have some influence on digitisation
                    practices within organisations providing material to the portal.

            

            

                Future Perspectives
                
Currently the project is preparing for the pilot phase of the Public Interface
                    which will start after the procurement of the Public Interface software. After
                    the pilot is complete, the Public Interface is expected to be fully implemented
                    and go live on 2011. Plans pertaining to long-term preservation will be
                    completed in the Summer 2010. It is, however, up to the next Finnish Government
                    to set guidelines for its implementation and future funding. 

                
During 2011 the NDL will transform from a project to a more sustainable
                    organisation continuing the present work with the entire library, museum and
                    archive sector as an essential part of the ongoing development of the national
                    digital infrastructure. 

                
For more information on the National Digital Library and the outcomes, news and
                    other deliverables of the project, see: 
http://www.kdk2011.fi/en
. 

            

        
    