
                
Temple gazetteers are a subset of the Chinese genre of gazetteers (difang zhi
                        
地方志
). Chinese gazetteers, or local histories, are
                    composite texts containing descriptions, bibliographies, poems and other
                    material pertaining to the history of a location or region. The temple
                    gazetteers produced since the 16th century are important for the study of
                    Chinese Buddhist history. They are especially relevant for the last three
                    hundred years, but contain much older material on the history of Buddhist
                    sites.

                
The archive is currently being constructed at the Dharma Drum Buddhist College,
                    Taiwan, and for the first time opens up a large amount of this material for the
                    study of Buddhism, which so far has been available only with great difficulty.
                    The project website is at: 
http://buddhistinformatics.ddbc.edu.tw/fosizhi/
.

                
The poster briefly introduces the content and then focusses on the technical
                    realization of the "Digital Archive of Buddhist Temple Gazetteers".

            

            

                
Though mainly conceived as an online image database, the project includes 12
                    large gazetteers as full-text. These are marked up in TEI for names and dates
                    and connected to the Buddhist Authority Database Project (
http://authority.ddbc.edu.tw
),
                    to serve information to the interface. The project is an example for the growing
                    trend to present full text next to digital facsimiles and the poster will show
                    one way this can be done.

                
As of autumn 2009, the image database consists of more than 100,000
                    archival-quality images in TIFF format. The images were scanned in 8-bit
                    greyscale at a resolution of 400dpi. From the digital master we produce
                    watermarked JPEG files for use in the interface, and these are made freely
                    available under a Creative Commons license. The quality of the JPEG files is
                    sufficient to read and research the material.

                
The main limitation on the facsimile value of these images is that they are scans
                    of copies of the original prints or manuscripts and therefore cannot achieve the
                    same verisimilitude as facsimiles taken directly from the originals. This
                    deficit is mitigated by the fact that the material itself is unproblematic.
                    Mostly text, it consists of black and white woodblock prints or brush writing.
                    Due to the large character-size and the high image resolution the actual
                    facsimile quality is high in the “Excellent Readability” range of the Quality
                    Index (QI) benchmark for printed text (Kenney & Chapman 1995). Eventually,
                    237 gazetteers will be digitized and made available in the image database.

            

            

                
The gazetteer project includes various kinds of meta-data. We use MIX (Meta-data
                    for still Images in XML) to record technical information about the image files,
                    and meta-data for the TEI full-text files is kept in the teiHeader section of
                    each file. While the MIX data is mainly generated automatically, the TEI
                    meta-data is created as part of the mark-up process.

                
There are two other important datasets. First is the bibliographic data, which
                    contains important information about the location of the temples, the
                    relationship between the two printed collections, the edition history and
                    chapter order of individual gazetteers, and additional bibliographic information
                    on gazetteers collected from other sources. All this is kept in TEI files to
                    allow for seamless integration with the other textual data.

                
Second, we have collected semantic data pertaining to each image file, i.e. each
                    page. This data includes the image filename and the page number from the printed
                    edition, which is required for the interface, especially for the majority of
                    gazetteers which have not been digitized as full-text. This semantic image
                    meta-data also records the first three characters on each page and, importantly,
                    all title headings that appear on the page. This results in a database of all
                    title headings, which in turn allows for shallow searches across the whole
                    archive.

                
Although for production purposes it was useful to create distinct meta-data
                    sources for the project, for archival purposes we integrate all of these
                    different resources in METS wrappers.

            

            

                
The interface is based on the the ExtJS JavaScript library (
http://extjs.com/
). ExtJS was chosen
                    because it is one of the more advanced JS libraries available. It provides many
                    vital interface functions ‘out-of-the-box’ and is used in for a number of other
                    projects at the Library and Information Center. The full-texts are kept in a
                    native XML database called eXist (
http://www.exist-db.org/
), which
                    stores and retrieves the TEI source files.

                
The interface is geared to enable convenient reading of the gazetteers online.
                    The design is based on the assumption that digital archives will increasingly
                    want to present electronic text in conjunction with and alongside electronic
                    facsimiles of the original source. Among the challenges we solved here was how
                    to have images and text move in unison. Another problem we faced was how to give
                    the user an idea about where she was in the structure of the text, and it was
                    decided to offer a detailed navigation panel, which contains detailed titles of
                    every section to address this need. Finally, for better and more convenient
                    accessibility of the image files we have included a magnifier to aid reading. A
                    sophisticated search function lets users choose to search for strings in the
                    fulltext, metadata or both, over the whole archive or one single gazetteer.

            

        
        

                
Bingenheimer, Marcus
forthcoming
Bibliographical notes on Buddhist temple gazetteers and
                            some remarks on their use for the study of Chinese Buddhist
                            history
Oslo Studies in Language
Brook, Timothy
Geographical Sources of Ming-Qing History
Ann Arbor
Univ. of Michigan, Center for Chinese
                            Studies
2002
Michigan monographs in Chinese Studies
58
Eberhard, Wolfram
Temple Building Activities in Medieval and Modern
                            China
Monumenta Serica
23
1964
264-318
Zhongguo Fosi Shizhi Huikan
中國佛寺史志彙刊
Taipei
1980-1985
Compiled by Du Jiexiang
                            
杜潔祥
 110 vols
Zhongguo fosizhi congkan
 中国佛寺志叢刊
Hangzhou: Guangling shushe 
广陵书社
2006
 Compiled by Zhang Zhi 
张智
130
                        vols

        