In this abstract, and more so in the poster-presentation, we will report on the
                process of, and the problems involved in, gaining a critical mass of users for an
                interactive hypertext application for the Digital Humanities. The aim of any DH
                application ultimately is to be used, but for collaborative ones, the contributions
                and interactions of existing users are often what make it worthwhile for new
                visitors. Gaining an initial critical mass of users for such applications is
                notoriously hard, but especially important if they are ever to be used at all.

            
First we briefly introduce LogiLogi, the system on which we are going to try to get a
                community started. Next our strategy for gaining users, some possible improvements,
                and attempts so far, are explained. Here we will also discuss the kinds of users we
                target, and the possible size of the application's critical mass. We finish
                with an overview of the usage-data that our poster will report on. 

            

                System
                
LogiLogi is a Web 2.0 application that tries to find an informal middle-road
                    between good conversations and journal-papers by providing a form of quick,
                    informal publication, peer-review, and annotation of short philosophical texts.
                    It is intended for all those ideas that one cannot turn into a full-sized paper,
                    but that one deems too interesting to leave to the winds.

                
It does not make use of forum-threads (avoiding their many problems), but of tags
                    and links that can also be attached to phrases by people other than the text's
                    original author. It also features a rating-system modelled after journal-based
                    review. Well-rated texts earn authors more voting-power, and thus a measure of
                    standing, within their peer group (of which there are multiple).

                
LogiLogi is Free Software, and has been under development for 3 years, during
                    which about 30 volunteers have done 8 man-years of work (worth $500.000). A
                    public beta is already online and fully functional at 
www.LogiLogi.org.

            

            

                Strategy
                
Things that have been done so far to gain users are, first of all, making sure
                    that LogiLogi works properly. LogiLogi has been extensively tested and improved
                    at the LIRMM lab of the University of Montpellier this September. And it was
                    used there by about 30 active users for internal discussions until the end of
                    October. Secondly, some seed-content has been added (about 100 philosophical
                    texts, some of which are part of larger essays). And finally, since October, it
                    has been made easy for users to track new replies, annotations, and votes for
                    their documents, both through a personalized RSS feed, and e-mail alerts. These
                    things have made LogiLogi practically usable for the first time. 

                

                    Target Audience
                    
LogiLogi has not yet been advertised widely, and changing this is one of the
                        first things we will do next. LogiLogi aims for a wide audience of scholars,
                        students, and people interested in philosophy, but to set the right tone, we
                        first aim for people with academic credentials (students and scholars).
                        Among them, most success is expected with students, both because of their
                        limited access to other publishing channels, and their greater average
                        computer-literacy. Possible places to reach them are forums, newsgroups, and
                        (limited) advertising via Google Adwords. 

                

                

                    Process
                    
Then, as part of user-driven, agile development, feedback will be collected
                        from users on possible improvements: both ongoing, from users on the web,
                        and from a small group of philosophers/students in a usability test. Some of
                        these improvements will then be implemented, after which we plan to repeat
                        the process, with another round of usability testing and improvements. 

                

                

                    Improvements
                    
A possible improvement so far identified is simplifying the application, for
                        example by (temporarily) limiting the number of voting-communities
                        (peergroups) to one. This would have the additional advantage of reducing
                        the number of users that are needed to reach critical mass, because votes
                        are no longer limited to, and divided between groups. While it is hard to
                        determine what the critical mass of LogiLogi would be, from what we saw in
                        the LIRMM case, it most likely lies between 30 to 60 active users per
                        peergroup (or for the whole site, if there is only one peergroup). To
                        examine this further, a small literature study of the notion of critical
                        mass, and of the factors influencing its size (especially for hypertext
                        based applications, close to the humanities) will also be undertaken.

                    
Another place for improvement is the editing and annotation process: its
                        responsiveness, especially, could be improved. LogiLogi currently requires
                        people to open a new page when they want to insert annotations or links,
                        while it would be a lot easier if this could be done while reading the text,
                        at least for simple annotations. And finally, a demo-video will be created,
                        which quickly explains what LogiLogi is, and how it can be used. 

                

                

                    Report
                    
In our poster we will present LogiLogi, explain the notion of critical mass,
                        and report on developments in the number of users. In addition, the
                        strategies and improvements we applied, and their practical, and causal
                        relationships will be explained, where possible. Also, we will not just be
                        reporting the number of registered users, or unique visitors, but also on
                        the number of documents, annotations, replies, and votes given over the
                        time-period from December 2009 until June 2010. Thus a detailed view will be
                        given of the process of gaining critical mass. 

                

            

            

                Conclusion
                
Whether we succeed or not in gaining a critical mass for LogiLogi, there will be
                    meaningful results from this experiment, as it not only involves presenting, or
                    further improving an already quite usable interactive Digital Humanities
                    application, but foremostly trying to give it a critical mass of users, and
                    exploring this process, producing insights and a valuable case-study (of success
                    or failure) for future Digital Humanities projects to learn from: projects which
                    will, most likely, be more interactive than their predecessors, and thus will
                    sooner or later face the same challenge of gaining a critical mass of users.
                

            

            

                
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Lars Buitinck,
                    Maarten Geraedts, Allan van Hulst, Auke Klazema, Bart Leusink, Miguel Lezama,
                    Charl Linssen, Jan Mikac, Steffen Michels, Roel 3 van Rijswijk, Bruno Sarlo,
                    Thierry Stamper, Artyom Syazantsev, Rens van Summeren, Pieter van der Vlis,
                    Jordy Voesten, Ilona Wilmont, Andrew Wolters and Feng Zhu for their
                    contributions to the development of LogiLogi over the years. Among them we want
                    to especially thank Bruno, Charl, Miguel, and Steffen, without whom LogiLogi
                    would not have been what it is today.

                
We would also like to thank the Philosophy Department of the University of
                    Groningen for the initial small grant that got LogiLogi started, and the
                    University of Nijmegen which twice provided a group of Computer and Information
                    Science students to work on LogiLogi for credits as part of their GIPHouse
                    program. In addition we are grateful to the OFSET (Organization for Free
                    Software in Education and Teaching) foundation for supporting us with a small
                    grant.

                
We would also like to thank the audiences of our presentations at the FOSDEM
                    (Free and Open source Software Developers' European Meeting) of 2007 and
                    2009 in Brussels, the TDOSE (Technical Dutch Open Source Event) of 2007 in
                    Eindhoven, the Netherlands, the ECAP (European conference on Computing and
                    Philosophy) conferences of 2008 and 2009 in Montpellier and Barcelona, the
                    Digital Humanities 2008 conference in Oulu, Finland, the RMLL (Rencontres
                    Mondiales du Logiciel Libre) of 2008 in Mont-de-Marssan, France, the FKFT (Free
                    Knowledge, Free Technology Conference) of 2008 in Barcelona, and the
                    Philosophers Rally of 2009 in Enschede, the Netherlands, for their questions and
                    insightful comments.

            

        
        

                
Abrahamsson, P. et al.
2002
Agile Software Development Methods: Review and
                            Analysis
VTT Publications
478
Baez, M. and Casati, F.
2009
Liquid Journals: Knowledge Dissemination in the Web
                            Era
LiquidPub Site
Ball, Philip
2005
Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another
Arrow Books Ltd
London
Economides, Nicholas and Himmelberg, Charles
1995
Critical Mass and Network Size with Application to the US
                            Fax Market. Tech. rep
New York University, Leonard N. Stern School of Business,
                            Department of Economics
New York
Evans, Mark
2010
What Makes a New Service Sticky?
Gladwell, Malcolm
2002
The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big
                            Difference
Abacus
New Edition
Grafton, Anthony
2009
Worlds Made by Words: Scholarship and Community in the
                            Modern West
Harvard University Press
Harvard
1st ed
Katz, Michael L. and Shapiro, Carl
1985
Network Externalities, Competition, and
                            Compatibility
American Economic Review
75.3
424-40
Kemper, Andreas
2009
Valuation of Network Effects in Software Markets: A Complex
                            Networks Approach
Physica-Verlag Heidelberg
Heidelberg
Kolb, David
2005
Association and Argument: Hypertext in and around the
                            Writing Process
The New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia: Applications
                            and Research
1
7-26
Kumar, V.
2008
Critical Mass in E-Education
Eighth IEEE International Conference on
                            Advanced Learning Technologies, 2008
Santander, Cantabria, Spain
2008
1009–1010
Levinson, Paul
2001
Digital McLuhan: A Guide to the Information
                            Millennium
Routledge
New Edition
Liebowitz, S. J.
2010
Network Externalities
LogiLogi.org
Philosophy Beyond the Book
2009
Marwell, Gerald and Oliver, Pamela
2007
The Critical Mass in Collective Action
Cambridge University Press
1st ed
Nadeau, Richard, Cloutier, Edouard and Guay, J. H.
1993
New Evidence About the Existence of a Bandwagon Effect in
                            the Opinion Formation Process
International Political Science Review/ Revue
                            internationale de science pol
14.2
203-213
O'Hear, Stephen
2004
Critical mass
Times Educational Supplement
4564
74
Papadimoulis, Alex
2010
The Great Pyramid of Agile - The Daily WTF
Prasarnphanich, P. and Wagner, C.
2008
Creating Critical Mass in Collaboration Systems: Insights
                            from Wikipedia
2nd IEEE International Conference on
                            Digital Ecosystems and Technologies, 2008
Phitsanulok, Thailand
2008
126–130
Prasarnphanich, P. and Wagner, C.
2008
Explaining the Sustainability of Digital Ecosystems based
                            on the Wiki Model through Critical Mass Theory
Schachter, Joshua
2010
Del.icio.us: How tags exploit the self-interest of
                            individuals to organize the Web for everyone
Sundararajan, Arun
2009
Network Effects
The LogiLogi Foundation
Software Libre for Your Web of Free Deliberation
2009
Wagner, C. et al.
20XX
Creating a Successful Professional Virtual Community: A
                            Sustainable Digital Ecosystem for Idea Sharing
Wiersma, W. and David, S.
2009
Two Scholarly Web-Agoras: The LogiLogi and Talia/Philospace
                            Approaches
ECAP 2009 Abstract
Barcelona, Spain
2009
Wiersma, W. and Lezama, M.
2008
LogiLogi: Combining Openness and Quality of Content
FKFT 2008 Proceedings
2008
Wiersma, W. and Sarlo, B.
2008
LogiLogi: A Webplatform for Philosophers
Digital Humanities 2008 Book of Abstracts
University of Oulu
Oulu, Finland
221–222
Wiersma, Wybo
2010
LogiLogi: Philosophy Beyond the Book

        