
                Subject
                

                    
Our Cultural Commonwealth
, a report of the American
                    Council of Learned Societies' Commission on Cyber Infrastructure for Humanities
                    and Social Sciences, (ACLS 2006) mentioned the relative "conservative culture of
                    scholarship" in the humanities and social sciences (as compared to the natural
                    sciences) as one of the explanations why researchers in these knowledge domains
                    might be hesitant in using the web and other digital resources for their
                    research.
 Before pointing to these researchers however, we may want to
                    question first of all the infrastructures and tools offered to those
                    researchers. Tools and services will only be taken up if they truly 
                    
serve
 researchers in their daily work. Infrastructures
                    and tools offered to humanities scholars should support concepts and approaches
                    specific to scholarly practices in humanities research, and, to that end, the
                    ACLS commission advocates “working in new ways” by “tools that facilitate
                    collaboration; an infrastructure for authorship that supports remixing, re-contextualization, and commentary—in sum, tools that turn access into 
                    
insight and interpretation
. [emphasis in original]”
                    (ACLS, p. 16).
                

                

                    Recently we have seen an increase of virtual laboratories, which use virtual
                    research environments (VREs) to facilitate collaboration among researchers and
                    to promote innovative use of tools and sources in humanities research.
 Therefore, although traditionally operating as sites of knowledge production in
                    the natural sciences, laboratories have started to develop into loci of
                    scholarly practice in the humanities too. This shift has also been reflected in
                    funding agencies’ support to online laboratory settings; their (re-) allocation
                    of financial resources is fed by expectations that more researchers will become
                    involved in digital and computational humanities, and that the use of
                    information and communication technologies (ICTs) in humanities research will
                    lead to new research questions, methodologies, and ways of collaborating.
                    However, it is not evident that the lab analogy can be transmigrated seamlessly
                    from a science field into the humanities.
                

                

                    Thus far, there has been little critical reflection on such lab initiatives,
                    although the use of VREs in the humanities certainly requires and merits
                    scholars’ attention. Now that a number of such large scale initiatives have
                    developed, there is an opportunity to reflect on what these VREs have achieved
                    and to evaluate their strengths and weaknesses for humanities research, as well
                    as to explore ways in which they should further develop. Therefore this panel
                    addresses theoretical, epistemological, hermeneutical and strategic questions
                    emerging from the use of VREs in digital and computational humanities in
                    general, and in humanities research of text and image in particular. It brings
                    together representatives of scholarly institutions developing virtual labs,
                    infrastructures, and tools to advance the study of text and image in humanities
                    research. The panel focuses on humanities labs promoting new scholarly practices
                    in VREs, and within this broader framework it concentrates on the following
                    specific themes:
                

                

                    
the benefits, challenges and obstacles of research practices emerging
                            from humanities research in virtual research environments.
the specificities of generating, analyzing and sharing linguistic and
                            visual data in online laboratory settings.
the advantages and barriers of scholarly collaboration across
                            disciplinary and geographic spans.
the main features of institutional and funding policies needed for
                            further development of digital humanities labs.
technical models potentially driving future development of local
                            initiatives.

            

            

                Organization of the panel
                

                    The research and development team of AlfaLab
 
                    —a digital humanities
                    initiative of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW)— is the
                    initiator and organizer of this panel. Panel members include humanities
                    researchers from KNAW; Digital Research and Scholarship and Scholarly
                    Communication Institute at the University of Virginia Library;
 POLIS and Virtual
                    Center on the Spatial Humanities;
 TextGRID;
  DARIAH;
 and the Text Analysis Portal for Research (TAPoR).
 The panelists are engaged in
                    the study and development of six different humanities labs dealing with text and
                    image analyses, which grants this panel a unique opportunity to comparatively
                    explore various strategies in building and using humanities labs, and to reflect
                    on both theoretical and practical concerns of that process. In addition, the
                    panel will critically evaluate —from the researchers' perspective— the focal
                    themes listed above, and it will address actions that might be taken to improve
                    the use of VREs in humanities research.

                

                    The panel session will be organized in the following way:
                
 
                

                    
The panel chair will introduce the main topic, discussion questions,
                            and the panelists; duration: 3 minutes;
Each of the panelists will give a short presentation (6 minutes),
                            followed by questions from the audience (4 minutes); duration: 60
                            minutes;
The themes and questions raised in the presentations will be further
                            discussed in an open forum between the panelists and the audience;
                            duration: 25 minutes;
The panel chair will briefly reflect on future plans, provide contact
                            information, and close the panel.

                
Panelists:

                

                    
Dr. Tobias Blanke, King's College London discussing DARIAH
Dr. David Bodenhamer, Director Polis Center discussing the Virtual Center on the
                            Spatial Humanities
Prof. Dr. Fotis Janidis: University of Wuerzburg (Germany) discussing
                            TextGRID
Dr. Bethany Nowviskie, Director Digital Research and Scholarship and
                            Associate Director Scholarly Communication Institute at the University
                            of Virginia Library - discussing NINES
Dr. Geoffrey Rockwell, University of Alberta TAPoR
Joris van Zundert (MA): Department of Software R&D at the
                            Huygens Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences -
                            project leader AlfaLab, discussing AlfaLab

            

            

                Moderators:
                

                    
Dr. Charles van den Heuvel (panel chair)
Dr. Smiljana Antonijevic Virtual Knowledge Studio (Royal Netherlands
                            Academy of Arts and Sciences)

            

            

        
        