

                
Zeta, a new measure of textual difference introduced by John F. Burrows, can be
                    used effectively in authorship attribution and stylistic studies to locate an
                    author's characteristic vocabulary–"marker" words that one author uses
                    consistently, but another author or authors use much less frequently or not at
                    all (Burrows 2005, 2006; Hoover 2007a, 2007b, 2008). Zeta analysis excludes the
                    extremely common words that have traditionally been the focus and concentrates
                    on the middle of the word frequency spectrum. Beginning in 2008, I developed an
                    Excel spreadsheet implementation of Zeta and its related measure Iota (which
                    focuses on words that are relatively rare in one author, but extremely rare or
                    absent from others), available on my Excel Text-Analysis Pages. Recently,
                    however, Craig has developed an alternative version of Zeta that simultaneously
                    creates sets of marker words and anti-marker words and has applied it
                    impressively to Shakespeare authorship problems (Craig and Kinney, 2009; Hoover,
                    forthcoming). Although Craig's Zeta focuses on the same part of the word
                    frequency spectrum as Zeta, its calculation and results are quite different.
                    Because it seems poised to become an important tool for computational
                    stylistics, I have created and will demonstrate the Craig Zeta Excel spreadsheet
                    that automates its calculation.

                
Craig's Zeta is a powerful but simple method of measuring differences among
                    authors. It begins with two sets of texts divided into about equal-sized
                    sections, then compares how many sections for each author contain each word,
                    ignoring the frequencies of the words and concentrating on their consistency of
                    appearance. The most natural comparison is between two authors, but it can be
                    used to study any contrast. My demo version contrasts thirteen female and
                    thirteen male American poets born between 1911 and 1943 (about 8,000 words of
                    poetry by each, divided into two sections).

                
The heart of the method is that it combines the ratio of the sections by one
                    author in which each word occurs with the ratio of the sections by the other
                    author from which it absent into a single measure of distinctiveness for each
                    word. Zeta scores theoretically range from two (for a word found in every
                    section by one author and absent from every section by the other), to zero (for
                    a word found in no sections by one author and in all sections by the other).
                    Sorting the words on this composite score produces two lists of words, one
                    favored by the first author and avoided by the second, the other favored by the
                    second author and avoided by the first.

                
The snippet from the spreadsheet in Fig. 1 (shown before the macro operates) will
                    clarify the calculation. In E7 and E8, the user enters labels (automatically
                    copied into columns A and G and Row 9) for the two groups to be compared. The
                    data to be analyzed is in columns H through CA, rows 11ff, with most columns
                    minimized so the various categories are visible. The combined word frequency
                    list for the two groups is in column G, with the raw frequencies for each word
                    in each section in columns H-CA. The calculation is performed in columns A-E.
                    Column D sums the sections of poetry by women that contain the word, and column
                    E sums the sections of poetry by men that do not contain the word. The most
                    frequent words typically occur in all sections, but note that 
me
, the 30
th
 most frequent word, is absent from one of the men's
                    sections. Column B calculates the ratio of women's sections containing the word
                    to the total number of women's sections; column C calculates the ratio of men's
                    sections not containing the word to the total number men's sections. Column A
                    sums columns B and C to produce the Zeta scores. Columns H-CA of row 1 show the
                    number of different words (word types) in each section, and below them, the
                    percentage of types that are marker words for women or men (these are not
                    meaningful until the macro has operated). In cells F2-F3 the user can set the
                    number of marker words for each group at different levels for sections of
                    different sizes and can see three sets of results at once in H-CA.

                
Figure 1
                    

                
An Excel macro automates the calculation of Zeta. Word frequency lists for the
                    texts to be analyzed are entered into five sub-sheets (not shown). One contains
                    the sections of the primary group and one contains the sections of the secondary
                    group. Two more sub-sheets contain any independent sections by the primary and
                    secondary groups (these can be used to test the method's success on known
                    texts). Finally, there is a sub-sheet for the texts to be tested. The macro
                    clears out old data, enters formulas into columns H-CA, rows 2-7, copies the
                    texts out of the sub-sheets into the main sheet, shrinks the columns, and enters
                    ranks for the words in column F. It then sorts the words on their Zeta scores in
                    column A, descending, so that the words most distinctively used by women appear
                    at the top and those most distinctively used by men are at the bottom. It
                    selects the 1000 most distinctive men's words and resorts them in reverse order,
                    with the most distinctive at the top of their section. The sheet can handle
                    15,000 words, but the sample above analyzes 14,000 words (calculated in cell
                    B2), so rows 11-1010 will contain the 1000 most distinctive women's words and
                    rows 13,011-14,010 the 1000 most distinctive men's words.

                
Figure 2 shows the data after the macro runs. Here 
mother's
, found in 13 of 26 sections by women and absent from 24 of 26
                    sections by men, is the most distinctive women's word in this comparison. The
                    most distinctive men's word, 
cross
, is found in just 3 of
                    26 sections by women, but is absent from only 10 of 26 sections by men. The most
                    distinctive words for each group are found in columns CB and CC in descending
                    order of distinctiveness. The figures in rows 2-7 of columns H-CA show how these
                    distinctive words are distributed in each section. For example, H2-H3 shows that
                    almost 15% of the words Derricote uses in this section are among the 500 most
                    distinctive women's words, but only about 5% are among the 500 most distinctive
                    men'swords. For Ammons (1), in AH2-AH3, the first section by a man, the
                    proportions are roughly reversed.

                
Figure 2
                    

                
Columns BH-CA contain the same information for the test sections, 25 sections of
                    poetry by seven female and seven male poets whose work had no part in the
                    creation of the word list on which the analysis is based. Finally, the macro
                    creates a scatter graph of the analysis with section names as labels (Fig. 3).
                    The vertical axis records the proportion of types in each text that are marker
                    words for men and the horizontal axis does the same for marker words for women.
                    As Fig. 3 shows, twenty of the twenty-five new sections of poetry (80%) trend
                    toward the group that matches their gender. The fact that these same words
                    produce a similar, though slightly less accurate, result for seven male and
                    seven female contemporary novelists is further evidence that the method is
                    capturing some kind of genuine difference. This is a strong result, especially
                    given the relatively small samples and the wide diversity that characterizes
                    20th century American poetry. The little chart that follows Fig. 3 shows some of
                    the clusters of related words that occur in the women's and men's marker words,
                    and hints at the kinds of analysis that Craig's Zeta makes possible.

                
Figure 3
                    

                
                    
Cluster
500 Women's Markers
500 Men's Markers
Family
mother's, father's, mother, father, children,
                                    ancestral, aunt, baby, birth, child, child's, cousins,
                                    daughters, family, generations, uncles
Religion
altar
, 
nuns
, and 
praying
faith, heaven, hell, prayers, souls, spirit,
                                    Christ, gods, myth, paradise, religion, spirits,
                                temple
Houses/Furniture
danced
song, dancing, sing, dance, sang, dancer, music,
                                    singer, singing, sings
Personal Pronouns
he'll, I'd, mine, ourselves, she'd, she's,
                                    they'd, you'd, you're, yourself

        
        

                
Burrows, J. F.
2006
All the Way Through: Testing for Authorship in Different
                            Frequency Strata
LLC
22
27-47
Burrows, J. F.
2005
Who wrote Shamela? Verifying the Authorship of a Parodic
                            Text
LLC
20
437-450
Craig, H., and Kinney, A., eds.
2009
Shakespeare, Computers, and the Mystery of
                            Authorship
Cambridge University Press
Cambridge
Hoover, D.
2007a
Corpus Stylistics, Stylometry, and the Styles of Henry
                            James
Style
41
174-203
Hoover, D.
2007b
Quantitative Analysis and Literary Studies
A Companion to Digital Literary Studies
Susan Schreibman
Ray Siemens
Blackwell
Oxford
517-33
Hoover, D.
2008
Searching for Style in Modern American Poetry
Directions in Empirical Literary Studies: Essays in Honor
                            of Willie van Peer
Sonia Zyngier
et. al.
John Benjamins
Amsterdam
211-27
Hoover, D.
2009
The Excel Text-Analysis Pages
Hoover, D.
2010: forthcoming
Authorial Style

        