
                
In 1823, at a small school in western Vermont, Frances Alsop Henshaw, the
                    14-year-old daughter of a prosperous merchant, produced a remarkable
                    cartographic and textual artifact. Henshaw’s "Book of Penmanship Executed
                    at the Middlebury Female Academy" is a slim volume, later bound in marble
                    boards, containing – in addition to the expected, set copy-texts of a
                    practice-book – a series of hand-drawn, delicately-colored maps of our nineteen
                    United States, each one paired with an edited, geometrically-designed and
                    embellished prose passage selected from the geography books available to a
                    schoolgirl in the new American republic.
Accession #2501 in the Rumsey
                        collection: 

                    Henshaw’s maps and texts alike are interpretive re-presentations of this body of
                    contemporaneous geodetic and descriptive literature. Formally, many of the
                    textual passages that accompany her maps are designed within a framework of
                    aesthetically-inflected cardinal coordinates, representing (either conceptually
                    or in their spatial contours) the states they describe, and positioning
                    political and natural boundaries in cartographically appropriate margins of the
                    page [see Figures 1 and 2].

                
As a work of juvenilia, Henshaw’s "Book of Penmanship" is no less
                    remarkable in its artistic and imaginative accomplishment for being exemplary of
                    larger trends in the geographic education of nineteenth-century Americans. A
                    sampler in codex form, the book constitutes a set of interrelated pedagogical
                    and personal exercises in geospatial and textual graphesis, or subjective
                    knowledge-production through the creation of images and texts-as-image. Drawing
                    exercises of this sort were developed by noted American educator Emma Willard,
                    founder of Henshaw’s Vermont school and author of several geography textbooks.
                    In a period when reading and recitation of geodetic texts were presumed the best
                    aids to spatial memory, Emma Willard believed that students should learn through
                    the personal creation and analysis of drawings – even, or perhaps especially, of
                    drawings that embed subjectivity and aesthetic choice. ("In history,"
                    wrote Willard, with characteristic confidence, "I have invented the
                        map.")
Emma Willard to "Miss Foster," 5 November 1848.
                        Reprinted in Lord’s Life of Emma Willard. New York: 1873; page 228.

                    My presentation argues that attention to the processes and products of Willard’s
                    pedagogy can be as fruitful for modern scholars, who grapple with the
                    integration of geospatial technologies into the interpretive humanities, as
                    geographers and literary historians demonstrate them to have been for
                    meaning-making among an increasingly spatially-literate populace in the early
                    years of the American republic (See Brückner, 2006; Schulten, 2007). 

                
Work and interest in the geospatial humanities is growing – at a variety of
                    scales, and with a variety of institutional inflections – in libraries, academic
                    departments, and digital centers around the world. Despite the richness of this
                    activity, scholars press up against a well-documented series of obstacles,
                    pragmatic and conceptual, in their use of spatial tools, datasets, and
                        methods.
See the executive summary and report of the 7th annual
                        Scholarly Communication Institute, Charlottesville, VA, 2009. SCI 7 focused
                        on "Spatial Technologies and the Humanities:" 
 and 
 In the ongoing interchange of the digital humanities, could new methods
                    and self-consciously literary and ludic perspectives permit us, with Emma
                    Willard, to 
invent the map?

                
An examination of spatial decision-making and of the interplay among text, image,
                    and geographical source material in the Henshaw book may suggest relations among
                    her enterprise and some ambitions held by modern humanities scholars for
                    geospatial technology. These relations hinge on an openness to graphesis and
                    iterative design as a legitimate method in digital scholarship. I will also
                    argue that a fresh, steady look at cartographic and geospatial technologies for
                    the digital humanities should not be taken alone in the context of
                    spatially-oriented disciplines (such as anthropology, area studies, archaeology,
                    and environmental history) that have more traditionally made use of these tools
                    and datasets and have, to greater and lesser extents, made peace with their
                    present limitations – a set of assumptions that underlie and circumscribe the
                    analytical and expressive power of geospatial information systems (GIS).
                    Instead, I want to extend our examination of GIS technologies and the
                    administrative, pedagogical, and scholarly publishing systems that support them
                        
into the realm of interpretive literary and textual
                        studies
 – and imagine them at a variety of scales: from support for a
                    complex mapping of print-culture production and distribution networks through
                    space and time; to the visualization of subjective spatial expression in
                    historical and literary documents; to an examination of the spatial and
                    typographical features of a single page, or class of page designs. What
                    potential might geographical tools and methods have for illuminating the
                    spatial, semantic, and intertextual features of books as well as landscapes? Can
                    we imagine a next generation of these tools in support of visual and aesthetic
                    methodologies for very traditional (and, in some cases, only marginally 
geos
patial) humanities interpretation?

                
If our aim is to promote, among colleagues in fields like literary studies and
                    digital history, a new and timely engagement with geospatial visualization as
                        
interpretive practice
 (timely both in terms of the burgeoning
                    development and use of what have been called "vernacular" or
                    crowd-sourced spatial datasets and interfaces outside of the academy, and in the
                    context of a growing interest in a return to pragmatic, methodological training
                    in graduate education within it),
“Vernacular” is perhaps a poor term to
                        address commercial, cloud-based, and “neo-geo” tools and interfaces based on
                        mobile technologies, GPS, virtual globes, and Web-based slippy maps. See
                        Scholarly Communication Institute 7 report on “vernacular” technologies
                        & reports from SCI 6 and 7 on methodological training: 
 we must ask the
                    following question: what is required of our shared tools, methods, and
                    pedagogical practices to allow us to make as meaningful a visual intervention in
                    our current scene as Emma Willard did in hers? 

                
 The deficiencies of existing geospatial applications and the social and academic
                    systems that support and promote their use have been adequately surveyed. Martyn
                    Jessop provides a thorough summary in the pages of 
LLC
,
                    when he identifies four factors contributing to a strange "inhibition"
                    of the use of geospatial information among digital humanists, a community not
                    generally daunted by the need to learn new software tools, metadata standards,
                    and data curation practices (Jessop, M., 2008). The "first and most
                    fundamental" of these inhibiting factors "concerns the use of data
                    visualization and images 
per se
 in the discourse-based
                    research methodology of the humanities" (42). That most humanities
                    disciplines only make superficial use of images and image-based methodologies
                    suggests an opportunity, if not a need, to interrogate our habitual interpretive
                    practices and the ways in which graduate education perpetuates a longstanding
                    marginalization of the visual – particularly infelicitous in light of the
                    opportunities for production and analysis afforded by new media. Other factors
                    involve: the suitability of current geospatial software packages to the
                    treatment of issues like subjectivity and emotion, temporality as experienced
                    and expressed in the documentary record, or interpretive inflection in the
                    humanities; and those specific qualities of humanities information unsuited to
                    tools that have been designed for synchronic analysis of incredibly dense
                    datasets (rather than for sparse, temporally-inflected data) and with a
                    scientific eye toward filtering out – rather than celebrating and analyzing –
                    uncertainties or ambiguities. Finally, Jessop treats broader issues of scholarly
                    communication: issues in funding, producing, evaluating, and distributing
                    innovative geospatial scholarship in disciplines whose structures evolved in
                    response to different conditions and expectations. With Jessop, I will suggest
                    that, "although we usually think of GIS as a positivist tool its greatest
                    contribution to the humanities… may be not as an analytical or information
                    presentation tool but as a reflexive one," allowing us not only to engage
                    with the "highly experiential" and qualitative features of our
                    datasets, but also to reflect on how we construct our disciplines (46).

                
Frances Henshaw’s "Book of Penmanship" – a sophisticated, if naïve,
                    1820s pen-and-ink GIS – serves here as an example of both an illuminative
                    process for, and a potential exemplar product of, a potential hermeneutic
                    involvement on the part of scholars with textual surrogates and geospatial
                    interfaces. We lack digital tools expressly crafted to promote the kind of
                    ludic, iterative, graphical engagement with book design and geographical
                    expression that is everywhere evident in the Henshaw cartifact. But the
                    components of these tools are all around us. It is less a technical than an
                    institutional and intellectual problem to identify the small pieces – and
                    practices – that must be loosely joined in order for humanities scholars to move
                    forward in the arena of geographic and textual graphesis, or knowledge-making
                    through graphical expression (Drucker, 2001; 2009). 

                
Is there a methodological approach that presents itself as a way to crack open
                    analytically – or perhaps just allow us to r
eplicate
 and
                        
play
 in digital environments with – the easy brand of
                    spatial and literary intertextuality evinced in Henshaw’s schoolgirl exercise? I
                    will look at a several classes of tools and digital humanities practices as a
                    way of getting at this question, including: the iterative, interpretive, and
                    structured sketching prototyped in Temporal Modelling (Drucker, J.D. and
                    Nowviskie, B., 2004) and Neatline;
Neatline is a tool for the creation of
                        interlinked timelines and maps as interpretive expressions of the literary
                        or historical content of archival collections, currently under development
                        by the Scholars’ Lab at the University of Virginia with generous funding by
                        the NEH: 
 data-mining for geography in massive text corpora through tools like
                    MONK and TAPoR, and what the Google Books research repositories and efforts like
                    HATHItrust must enable in their APIs to contribute to this field;
In this
                        area of activity, see Stephen Ramsay (2005) on "computational analysis
                        in literary studies as a quest for interpretations inspired by
                        pattern," which can move the "hermeneutical justification of the
                        activity away from the denotative realm of science and toward the more
                        broadly rhetorical and exegetical practices of the humanities."

                    textual and graphical collation interfaces predicated on visualization rather
                    than – or as much as – on structured markup, such as Juxta and
                        Sappheos;
See 

                        and 
 mobile,
                    GPS-powered tools and toys; and powerful, analytical GIS applications like the
                    ESRI products, not at all designed for textual studies, but ready nonetheless
                    for some dedicated gate-crashing.

                

                    
Fig. 1: 
Connecticut, one of 19 maps in Frances
                                Henshaw’s "Book of Penmanship Executed at the Middlebury Female
                                Academy," 29 April 1823. Library of David Rumsey.

                

                    
Fig. 2: 
Descriptive and positional text accompanying
                                the Connecticut map; Frances Henshaw, 1823. Library of David
                                Rumsey..

            

        
        

                
Brückner, Martin.
2006
The Geographic Revolution in Early America: Maps, Literacy,
                            and National Identity
University of North Carolina Press
Drucker, Johanna
2009
SpecLab: Digital Aesthetics and Projects in Speculative
                            Computing
MIT Press
Drucker, J.D. and Nowviskie, B.
2004
Speculative Computing: Temporal Modelling
A Companion to Digital Humanities
Susan Schreibman and Ray Siemens
Blackwell
Oxford
431-447
Drucker, Johanna 
2001
Digital Ontologies: The Ideality of Form in/and Code
                            Storage—or— Can Graphesis Challenge Mathesis?
Leonardo
34:2
Jessop, Martyn
2008
The Inhibition of Geospatial Information in the Digital
                            Humanities
Literary and Linguistic Computing
23:1
Ramsay, Stephen
2005
In Praise of Pattern
TEXT Technology: the journal of computer text
                            processing
Volume 14, Number 2
Schulten, Susan
2007
Emma Willard and the graphic foundations of American
                            history
Journal of Historical Geography
33
542-564

        