The main purpose of this research is to develop a system to keep over 800-year-old
                historical records written in traditional Mongolian script for future use, to
                digitize all existing records and to make those valuable data available for public
                viewing and screening. There are over 50,000 registered manuscripts and historical
                records written in traditional Mongolian script stored in the National Library of
                Mongolia. About 21,100 of them are handwritten documents. There are many more
                manuscripts and books stored in libraries of other countries such as China, Russia
                and Germany. Despite the importance of keeping 800-year-old historical materials in
                good condition, the Mongolian environment for material storage is not satisfactory
                to keep historical records for a long period of time (Tungalag, 2005). We believe
                that the most efficient and effective way to keep and protect old materials of
                historical importance while making them publicly available is to digitize historical
                records and create a digital library.

            
Mongolia introduced a new writing system (Cyrillic) in 1941. This was a radical
                change and alienated the traditional Mongolian script. The spelling of words and
                suffixes in traditional Mongolian script differs from spellings in modern Mongolian
                (Cyrillic). This is due to traditional Mongolian script preserving a more ancient
                language while modern Mongolian reflects pronunciation differences in modern
                dialects. Spellings used in traditional Mongolian script reflect the Mongolian
                language spoken in the days of Genghis Khan but also contain elements of the ancient
                Mongolian language spoken before that era. Thus traditional Mongolian has a
                different grammar and a distinct dialect from modern Mongolian. At present, people
                use dictionaries with transcribing suffixes to overcome differences.

            
Recently ancient historical documents in traditional Mongolian script are being
                digitized and made publicly available, thanks to advances in innovative
                information technologies, and the popularity of the Internet. In Windows Vista, and
                later versions, especially in Windows 7, text-display support for traditional
                Mongolian script and the input locale is enabled. The Uniscribe driver was updated
                to support OpenType advanced typographic functionality of complex text layouts such
                as traditional Mongolian script. Traditional Mongolian script is written vertically
                from top to bottom in columns advancing from left to right.

            
However, retrieval of the required information in modern Mongolian from traditional
                Mongolian script documents is not a simple task, due to substantial changes in
                Mongolian language over time. We want to offer an information retrieval method that
                considers language difference over time. Our goal in this research is to develop a
                retrieval system where a user can access cross-period and cross-script databases
                with a query input in a modern language.

            

                Related Research
                
Much research has been conducted in the last decade on Cross-language information
                    retrieval (CLIR) – a technique to retrieve documents in one language through a
                    query in another language. On the contrary, little research has been completed
                    regarding information retrieval techniques for historical documents. Still less,
                    almost none of the breakthroughs in research on information retrieval and
                    information access have aimed at retrieving information in the native language
                    from an ancient, cross-period and/or cross-script foreign language documents.
                    Almost none of the CLIR systems has integrated either modern (Cyrillic) or
                    traditional (ancient) Mongolian language due to its research backwardness.

                
Few approaches (Ernst-Gerlach et al., 2007; Garmaabazar et al., 2008; Kimura et
                    al., 2009) that could be considered a cross-period information retrieval have
                    been proposed. Little research has been completed regarding information
                    retrieval techniques for historical documents. Ernst-Gerlach et al. (2007)
                    developed a retrieval method that considers the spelling differences and
                    variations over time. They focused on modern and archaic German. Kimura et al.
                    (2009) proposed a retrieval method that considers not only language differences
                    over time, but also cultural and age differences in the same language. They
                    focused on retrieval techniques for modern and archaic Japanese. Khaltarkhuu et
                    al. (2008) proposed a retrieval technique that considers cross-period
                    differences in dialect, script and writing systems of the same language. They
                    focused on modern and traditional Mongolian.

            

            

                System Architecture
                
We propose a simple model to cope with cross-period and cross-script queries. The
                    proposed model is shown in Figure 1.

                

                    
Figure 1
                        
Outline of the proposed approach

                
In the first stage, the query in a modern language will be translated into a
                    query in an ancient form. Consequently, a query in the ancient language is
                    submitted as a retrieval query for digital collections. The proposed model is
                    expected to perform cross-period information retrieval and a user will be able
                    to access ancient historical databases with a query input in a modern language.
                    We will adopt a dictionary-based query translation approach.

            

            

                Implementation of the Proposed System
                
Although it is not easy to develop such a retrieval system, we will utilize
                    existing approaches (Garmaabazar et al., 2008; Kimura et al., 2009) to realize
                    the proposed approach. A prototype called the Traditional Mongolian Script
                    Digital Library
http://www.dl.is.ritsumei.ac.jp/tmsdl
 (TMSDL) (Garmaabazar
                    et al., 2008), which could be considered a cross-period information retrieval
                    system, has been developed. The retrieval method of the TMSDL considers
                    cross-period differences in writing system of the ancient and modern Mongolian
                    languages.

                
However, retrieval techniques of the TMSDL have not considered irregular words
                    which have different meanings but are written and pronounced exactly the same in
                    modern Mongolian and have different forms in traditional Mongolian. Also, word
                    sense disambiguation has not been considered. Thus, we enhanced the TMSDL by
                    integrating a dictionary-based cross-period information retrieval approach. We
                    utilized the developing online version of the Tsevel's concise Mongolian
                            dictionary
http://toli.query.mn/
 (Tsevel, 1966) under
                    the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported
                    license.

                
The Altan Tobchi (year 1604, 164pp) – A chronological book of ancient Mongolian
                    Kings, Genghis Khan and the Mongol Empire (the largest contiguous empire in
                    history) is shown in Figure 2, with modern Mongolian input interface in the new
                    version of TMSDL (TMSDLv2). A database of such historical records in the TMSDLv2
                    with English or modern Mongolian query input will help someone conducting
                    research in the history of the High Middle Ages, accessing materials written in
                    an ancient language (traditional Mongolian) in order to understand 13
th
-14
th
 century history of Asia.

                

                    
Figure 2
                        
Modern Mongolian (Cyrillic) input at the TMSDLv2 to access
                            historical records

            

            

                Experiments
                
After the enhancement, we conducted a preliminary experiment to examine the
                    difference between the TMSDL and the TMSDLv2 as well as to check the accuracy
                    of translations from the modern language to the ancient one. We compared our
                    retrieval results from the two versions with the "Qad-un űndűsűn
                    quriyangγui altan tobči", (Textological Study) (Choimaa et al., 2002). This
                    textological study contains the detailed analysis of traditional Mongolian
                    words' frequency in the Altan Tobchi. All queries that were retrieved in
                    the TMSDL were retrieved in the TMSDLv2. Therefore, we selected single word
                    queries that were not retrieved in the TMSDL. In addition, selection criteria
                    for the query input are: 
Pronounced or written differently in modern and traditional Mongolian;
                            and
With higher frequency in the Altan Tobchi.
 In the experiment of retrieving traditional Mongolian documents via
                    modern Mongolian (Cyrillic) utilizing a dictionary, we found that the TMSDLv2
                    translates and retrieves about 86% of selected input queries. However, about 64%
                    of input queries have some variations that are less than or greater than the
                    actual frequency because of the possible errors of translation and text
                    digitization, or limitations of the retrieval function. We are working to
                    distinguish the causes. Our translation module failed to translate 14% of input
                    queries. Improvements on retrieval results are illustrated in Figure 3. Sample
                    retrieval results are shown in Table 1. Retrieved results in the TMSDLv2 with
                    highlights are shown in Figure 4. 

                

                    
Figure 3
                        
Improvements on retrieval results of the TMSDL

                

                    
Table 1
                        
Sample retrieval results of each query term in details

                

                    
Figure 4
                        
Retrieval results at the TMSDLv2

            

            

                Conclusion
                
In this paper, we proposed a model that utilizes cross-period and cross-script
                    digital collections, which can be used to access old documents written in an
                    ancient language using a query in a modern language. The proposed system is
                    suitable for full text searches on databases containing cross-period and
                    cross-script documents. Such research would involve extensive research in an
                    ancient language that users and humanities researchers may or may not
                    understand. It could apply to humanities researchers who are conducting research
                    on ancient culture and looking for relevant historical materials written in that
                    ancient language. The proposed model will enable users and humanities
                    researchers to search for such materials easily in a modern language.

                
However, in our experiment, the TMSDLv2 translates and retrieves about 86% of
                    input queries; only 22% is retrieved without any error. The other 64% has some
                    differences on the number of retrieved query terms. For future development,
                    improvements on translation and retrieval techniques need to be considered to
                    increase the retrieval precision.

                
For future research, enhancements such as the retrieval of information from two
                    distinct languages and retrieval via single query input from multiple humanities
                    databases in multiple languages need to be developed. Our future work includes
                    evaluating retrieval effectiveness by conducting extensive experiments that
                    consider language differences over time. Performance of this approach will be
                    compared with other approaches.

            

        
        

                
Choimaa, Sh. and Shagdarsuren, Ts.
2002
Qad-un űndűsűn quriyangγui altan tobči, (Textological
                            Study)
Centre for Mongol Studies, NUM
Ulaanbaatar
(In Mongolian) 
Ernst-Gerlach, A. and Fuhr, N.
2007
Retrieval in text collections with historic spelling using
                            linguistic and spelling variants
Proceedings of the 7
th
 ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries
                            (JCDL2007)
Vancouver, Canada
June 2007
333-341
Garmaabazar, Kh. and Maeda, A.
2008
Developing a Traditional Mongolian Script Digital
                            Library
Proceedings of the 11
th
 International Conference on Asia-Pacific Digital Libraries
                            (ICADL2008)
Bali, Indonesia
December 2008
41-50
Kimura, F. and Maeda, A.
2009
An Approach to Information Access and Knowledge Discovery
                            from Historical Documents
Conference Abstracts of the Digital
                            Humanities 2009 (DH09)
College Park, MD
June 2009
359-361
Tsevel, Y.
1966
Mongol helnii tovch tailbar toli
Ulaanbaatar (Mongolian)
Tungalag, D.
2005
Mongol ulsiin undesnii nomiin san dahi Mongoliin tuuhiin
                            gar bichmeliin nomzuin sudalgaa
Ulaanbaatar (Mongolian)
1

        