
                
When the famous seventeenth-century gardener John Tradescant named his home, with
                    its collection of rarities and curiosities, “the Ark,” he was expressing his
                    desire to compile a microcosm of a wide world of variety beyond common
                    experience. Such collections represented the sum of early modern European
                    experience of the world at a time of rapid scientific and geographical expansion
                    and reflected fundamental epistemological shifts in attitudes toward curiosity,
                    wonder, and credulity on the cusp of the modern age. The rapidly expanding world
                    of exploration, colonization, and commerce in the seventeenth century
                    proliferated with strange and bizarre creatures and artifacts that challenged
                    the traditional limits of knowledge. To meet the need for a complete and
                    accessible record of early modern collections, 'The Digital "Ark"' will
                    accumulate a database of artifacts and natural specimens as represented by
                    documentary records of early modern collections (inventories, diaries,
                    correspondence, etc.), contemporary drawings and engravings, as well as digital
                    images and curatorial records of extant remnants of these collections. It will
                    be an extensive record of all known collections of rarities and curiosities in
                    England and Scotland from 1580-1700 for which documentary evidence survives,
                    comprising up to 10,000 specimens and artifacts. This information, both textual
                    and visual, will be delivered in an open-access Web-based virtual museum that
                    will collect and display artifacts and natural specimens drawing from a fully
                    searchable database that will record and classify these items and their
                    descriptions in some two dozen fields of information. 

                
This poster will briefly introduce the project and then focus on the challenges
                    this data poses for a computational process that involves naming data types and
                    defining relationships between them. The principle challenge comes from two
                    unique aspects of the project: 
The need to accommodate in the user interface a wide range of source
                            genres in a rationalized and consistent form, while representing the
                            distinct epistemological modes of these diverse forms of
                            representation;
The need to respect and reflect the way the data was viewed and
                            understood in this age of transition between humanistic and empirical
                            ways of knowing as we interpret the data set and design a database
                            structure to encode, store, and represent this data in all of its
                            complex relationships.

                
 The poster will have four sections: 
An introduction providing a brief paragraph on the cultural background
                            illustrated with a bulleted set of statistics and a 17th-century
                            engraving of a typical cabinet of curiosities.
 A chart depicting the diverse data types that provide the content of
                            the digital ark, including: letters; travel accounts; diaries,
                            inventories and catalogues; discursive prose; poetry; contemporary
                            engravings; drawings and paintings; modern photographs of extant
                            objects; and secondary scholarly sources) along with the characteristics
                            of these genres that complicates the process of defining data
                            structures. Page facsimiles will illustrate these data types.
A chart depicting the differences between a taxonomic and an
                            ontological view of data. In brief, the taxonomic approach involves
                            entry into a new body of data and the naming and categorizing process
                            that occurs as one interprets and makes sense of this new data, while
                            the ontological approach involves fixing categories and properties in a
                            determined order of being. The seventeenth century represented a
                            significant shift from ontology, where the nature of existence was
                            received and commonly understood by all, to an age of taxonomy, where
                            the new and strange demanded an open-ended reconsideration of the world
                            of existence and a continual configuration of knowledge. In the computer
                            age, we are experiencing a similar tension in the desire to explore and
                            discover relationships between data, while at the same time thinking of
                            data representation in terms of ontologies. This chart will represent
                            this tension both in the context of the epistemology of the early modern
                            collections and the context of computer processes that might be employed
                            to represent them.
The conclusion will outline two steps that will be taken to address
                            these needs: 
The use of qualitative tagging as a means to interrogating the
                                    source documents to find what is there, before determining the
                                    tag set that will inform the final data structure, that is, to
                                    infer a taxonomy rather than simply impose an assumed
                                    ontology.
The use of a combination of the TEI structure to represent
                                    text-based sources with modified object-based ontologies to
                                    represent the objects as depicted in these textual sources and
                                    also as depicted in graphical sources, both contemporary
                                    engravings and drawings, and modern photographs of extant
                                    objects.

            

            

                
Acknowledgments
This project is funded by the Social
                    Sciences and Humanities Council of Canada.

            

        
        

                
Bradley, John
Documents and Data:
                            Modelling Materials for Humanities Research in XML and Relational
                            Databases
Literary and Linguistic Computing: Journal of the
                            Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing
20.1
2005
133-51
Corns, Thomas N.
The Early Modern Search Engine: Indices, Title Pages,
                            Marginalia and Contents
The Renaissance Computer: Knowledge Technology in the First
                            Age of Print
Neil Rhodes
Jonathan
                            Sawday
London,
                            England
Routledge
2000
95-105
Daston, Lorraine
2007
Objectivity
Peter
                            Galison
New York
Zone
                            Books
Daston, Lorraine
1989
The
                            Museum: Its Classical Etymology and Renaissance Genealogy
Journal of the History of Collections
1.1
59-78
Gilbert, Neal Ward
1960
Renaissance Concepts of
                            Method
New York
Columbia University Press
Grindle, Nick
'No Other Sign Or Note than
                            the very Order’: Francis Willughby, John Ray and the Importance of
                            Collecting Pictures
Journal of the History of Collections
17
2005
15-22
Harmon, Margaret
Stretching Man’s Mind: A History of Data Processing
New
                            York
Mason/Charter
1975
Leith, Philip
Postmedieval Information Processing and Contemporary
                            Computer Science
Media, Consciousness, and Culture: Explorations of Walter
                            Ong’s Thought
Bruce E. Gronbeck
Thomas J.
                            Farrell
Paul A. Soukup
Newbury Park,
                            CA
Sage
                            Publications
1991
160-176
Liu, Yin
Jeff Smith
A
                            Relational Database Model for Text Encoding
Rept. Digital Studies/Le champ numérique
0.11
2008
MacGregor, Arthur
Curiosity and Enlightenment: Collectors and Collections
                            from the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Century
New Haven, CT
Yale University Press
c2007
Marcus, Leah
The Silence of the Archive and the Noise of
                            Cyberspace
The Renaissance Computer: Knowledge Technology in the First
                            Age of Print
Neil Rhodes
Jonathan
                            Sawday
London,
                            England
Routledge
2000
18-28
Obrst, Leo
Howard Liu
Knowledge Representation, Ontological Engineering, and
                            Topic Maps
XML Topic Maps: Creating and using Topic Maps for the
                            Web
Sam
                            Hunting
Boston
Addison-Wesley
c2003
103-149
Sowa, John F.
Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical, and
                            Computational Foundations
Pacific
                            Grove
Brooks/Caole
2000
Stafford, Barbara Maria
Good Looking:
                            Essays on the Virtue of Images
Cambridge, Ma.
MIT
                            Press
1996

        