
                Background
                
Now fifteen years old, the still-growing American Memory Web site at the Library
                    of Congress (
http://memory.loc.gov/
) offers more than 130 separate and diverse
                    multi-media collections — comprising more than a million digitized library items
                    — to a vast base of virtual patrons across the Internet. Yet despite radical
                    changes in the ways that people have come to use the World Wide Web, the
                    fundamental conception of American Memory and its collections remains much as
                    envisaged fifteen years ago. What happens next to such established but largely
                    static digital resources? Aside from implementing obvious upgrades such as
                    higher-resolution image scans, cleaned-up OCR, fleshed-out metadata, or faceted
                    search capabilities, how might cultural repositories more fundamentally enhance
                    their existing online content? Can we fully (re)imagine a second iteration, a
                    next generation, for already digitized historical materials? 


                
Our demonstration project works to consider this question for a single American
                    Memory collection, purposely setting aside issues of scale or interoperability
                    in favor of exploring effective and compelling ways to convey to users the
                    particular character of specific historical resources. Starting with the
                    unpublished manuscript diary of Horatio Nelson Taft (1861-62), already digitized
                    (as textual transcription with page images) at 
http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/tafthtml/tafthome.html
, we have chosen to
                    explore the implications of creating several alternate and explicitly
                    interpretive frameworks by applying multiple XML markup to this bounded but
                    compellingly dense and historically significant text.


                
American Memory patrons bring unusually diverse research needs to the same body
                    of historical materials: typical users include everyone from elementary school
                    students and hobbyists to lawyers, librarians, college professors and members of
                    Congress. Our project’s concerns stem from this diversity as well as from our
                    own role as scholars of American culture working with historical materials in a
                    library setting. Traditional library practice treats sources as analytically
                    separate from their interpretation, even while the most basic interventions of
                    librarianship are fundamentally interpretive. Historians, by contrast, well
                    recognize their own work with sources as interpretive, but still tend to view
                    textual sources as fully fixed in meaning. 


                
Textual analysis is an underdeveloped tool in American historical study, and
                    history as a discipline has lagged behind literature in imagining computing as a
                    threshold for innovative research. Historians’ traditional use of computing has
                    trended quantitative rather than qualitative, while recent innovations emphasize
                    creating tools to assist the mechanics of research or scholarly interaction
                    rather than transforming them. Explorations of how computing might fundamentally
                    change the practices of history or the outcomes of historical interpretation are
                    still needed.


                
Against this background the Taft Diary project takes on several related goals:
                    (1) to visibly demonstrate a historical text’s accessibility to multiple
                    simultaneous interrogations enacted through digital scholarship; (2) to more
                    fully explore the multidimensionality of a significant historical text; (3) to
                    introduce the methods and questions of digital humanists more centrally into a
                    library context (making them better known to library practitioners and more
                    widely available to diverse library audiences); and (4) to meld the questions
                    and methods of historians with the advances in digital textual scholarship
                    arising among literary scholars. With our project we hope to establish a model
                    for text-based scholarship — literary and ethnographic as well as historical —
                    that foregrounds the individual user’s interpretative needs while also conveying
                    that interpretation to the broad variety of the diary's potential users. 

            

            

                The artifact and its text
                
The Horatio Nelson Taft Diary commands wide historical interest. When it was
                    introduced to the public on the Library’s Web site in 2001, it offered the first
                    new information about the events of Abraham Lincoln’s death to come to light in
                    half a century. In fact the diary emerges from the confluence of multiple
                    transformative historical developments: not only the American Civil War and
                    Lincoln’s presidency, but profound long-term changes including the rise of the
                    American middle class; the nation’s industrial, technological, and consumer
                    revolutions; the decisive expansion in the size and influence of the federal
                    government; and the maturation of Washington, DC, as a complex urban community
                    of national and international importance.


                
An exceptional historical record on many levels, the Taft Diary is also unusually
                    well suited to an experiment in simultaneous multidimensional interpretive
                    markup. Its contents are rich in the overlap of ordinary life and significant
                    events, people, and places, thereby appealing both to specialized historians and
                    to a broad general audience. Its limited size offers definite boundaries to the
                    range, though not the depth, of interpretive markup. Moreover, the formulaic
                    pattern underlying most of its daily entries invites ready comparison while
                    ensuring an organizing degree of structural regularity.


                
Taft’s three-volume manuscript diary consists of daily entries from January 1,
                    1861, through April 11, 1862 (the end of vol. 1), and less frequent entries
                    through May 30, 1865. The current phase of our project deals only with vol. 1,
                    which contains in total 466 entries. Because Taft used a printed blank diary
                    book for vol. 1, each 1861 entry is eleven handwritten lines long, or typically
                    ninety to one hundred words (
fig. 1
).
                    (The volume’s 1862 entries, written into pages intended for back matter, vary
                    more in length.) Beyond the consistency of the entries’ length, certain content
                    elements recur so frequently as to be almost formulaic: information about the
                    weather, illnesses within and beyond the family circle, political and military
                    news about the Civil War, and the people and locations that populate Taft’s
                    daily life. 
Figure 1: Taft Diary vol. 1, entries for Sept. 19-21, 1861;
                            transcription of Sept. 20 entry
                        

            

            

                Implementation
                
In selecting markup schemas, we considered and discarded a number of interpretive
                    typologies, including Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) (
http://www.loc.gov/aba/cataloging/subject/
) and the Library of
                    Congress Classification Outline (
http://www.loc.gov/catdir/cpso/lcco/
), because they turn out to lack
                    a consistent level of granularity across cultural and historical domains.
                    Seeking to demonstrate applicability and variety, for phase one we selected
                    three schemas for their breadth as well as depth, their flexibility, and their
                    inherent relevance to the content of our text: 
TEI, 
http://www.tei-c.org/ 
Outline of Cultural Materials (OCM), 
http://www.yale.edu/hraf/outline.htm
Scholar-defined “webs of significance” such as: 
Taft’s recurring concerns 
weather
places
illness
networks 
of social relationships
how news is conveyed


                
These three schemas together provide for theoretical and well as methodological
                    diversity, representing a variety of approaches to the analysis of historical
                    texts. TEI is a widely used standard for the representation of texts in digital
                    form, with well-developed editorial standards and an established community of
                    users. The OCM is anthropological, deriving from attempts to develop
                    comprehensive categorizations of human cultural phenomena. Scholar-defined “webs
                    of significance” follow from our own close readings of the text. In the future
                    we anticipate exploring additional markup typologie based in the Thesaurus for
                    Graphic Materials (
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/collection/tgm/
), GIS, and data
                    visualizations, so as to demonstrate the diversity and versatility of
                    interpretation that simultaneous multiple markup can sustain. 


                
Our baseline text for markup is the transcription of Taft’s vol. 1, which was
                    originally provided in SGML mapped to the American Memory DTD. Our own markup
                    reverses normalizations in transcription in favor of a diplomatic version, and
                    strips out the older SGML tags. 


                
 Implementation raises methodological and technical challenges. In our process we
                    must move from theoretical issues to the development of standards for each tag
                    category, exploring the dilemmas that intensive and self-created markup entails:
                    for example, whether phrases or sentences should be the unit of markup with OCM
                    tags (
fig. 2
). Resolving such questions
                    requires us to confront the practical challenges of creating markup conventions
                    originally based in theory rather than established practice. Theoretical
                    language about multiplicity is inspiring — and even starts to get at the truth
                    of lived experience — but in practice we must also make sound choices about how
                    to complete the markup with reasonable consistency so that others may use and
                    rely on it. Further, do we mark the same text multiple times, or invest
                    ourselves in some version of a standoff markup (see the XStandoff toolkit, for
                    example)? How do we best present multiple interpretive options to our audience?
                    At this level, the Taft Diary project is still a work in progress. 
Figure 2: Text of Taft Diary vol. 1, Sept. 20 entry showing conceptual
                            phrase-level OCM markup
                        

            

            

                Conclusion
                
We anticipate that simultaneous multiple markup will render the text dynamic,
                    surfacing its performative and ritualized aspects; and that it will invite new
                    attention to its literary and linguistic aspects. Markup can also foreground key
                    aspects of worldview of which the writer himself was unaware. In these and other
                    ways, simultaneous multiple markup becomes a new instrument of historical
                    interpretation, reimagining analysis beyond the realm of narrative prose.


                
While our technical questions are not yet fully answered, and the project itself
                    is ongoing, we seek to share important methodological and theoretical questions,
                    and our conclusions so far, with our colleagues in digital humanities. 

            

        
        

                
Cohen, Daniel J.
Rosenzweig, Roy
Digital History: A Guide to Gathering, Preserving, and
                            Presenting the Past on the Web
Philadelphia
University of Pennsylvania
                            Press
2006
Geertz, Clifford
1973
Thick Description
The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays
New York
Basic Books
3-30
McGann, Jerome
Marking Texts of Many Dimensions
A Companion to Digital Humanities
Schreibman, Susan
Siemens, Ray
Unsworth, John
198-217
Oxford
Blackwell
2004
Milligan, Frank D.
A City in Crisis: The Wartime Diaries of Horatio Nelson
                            Taft
President Lincoln’s Cottage
entry of August 1
2007
blog
Sellers, John
Washington in Crisis, 1861-1865: Library Acquires the Diary
                            of Horatio Nelson Taft
Library of Congress Information
Bulletin 61, no. 2
February 2002
Stührenberg, Maik
Jettka, Daniel 
A Toolkit for Multi-Dimensional Markup: The Development of
                            SGF to XStandoff
Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2009
Balisage Series on Markup Technologies
3 vols
2009

        