
                    
In March 2004, Slashdot, the online news aggregator 'for nerds', cited a web
                        page featuring animated network visualizations of the relationships between
                        characters in Shakespeare’s plays.
 The Shakespeare
                        site began getting hits at a rate of 250,000 hits per hour. Programmer Paul
                        Mutton created the diagrams by feeding Shakespeare’s plays into an IRC
                        (Internet Relay Chat) bot designed to visualize social networks. The
                        Slashdot story promised that the diagrams would allow users to “see
                        Shakespeare in an entirely new light”.
 Mutton also presented his work at a conference on Information
                            Visualization in 2004. See 

                    
Social network analysis, the mapping of relationships as networks, has truly
                        provided new insights in the social and life sciences with increasing
                        participation from mathematicians and computer scientists. The idea that
                        there are laws that govern networks--such as the notion that everyone is at
                        most six steps away from any other person on earth, and that networks evolve
                        in predictable ways--has led to remarkable discoveries in fields from
                        sociology to biology. These insights furthered publications such as Six
                        Degrees (by sociologist Duncan Watts)
Watts, D.J. (2003). Six Degrees:
                            The Science of a Connected Age 1st ed., W. W. Norton &
                            Company
 presenting these discoveries (and the science behind
                        them) to a more general audience. In addition, online communities such as
                        Facebook, Twitter, MySpace, etc., have demonstrated the utility and power of
                        network theory in our daily lives.

                    
With popular awareness of these tools and techniques, combined with the
                        promise of new insights into ever-increasing amounts of data, network
                        analysis has significant appeal to digital humanities scholars. However,
                        these investigations call for tools and software to gather and clean large
                        amounts of data, even when the researcher opts for analyzing only a tiny
                        fraction of these vast data sets. Moreover, to interpret these datasets, a
                        good understanding of network analysis, as well as other visualization means
                        is necessary. Overcoming the hurdle of handling complicated technological
                        tools and acquisition of the necessary expertise in network theory both
                        demand investment on the side of researchers, a risky investment that only a
                        handful of humanities scholars are willing to make.
Social network
                            analysis is a more popular tool among social scientist then humanities
                            scholars. A search at Web of Science for the search term returns around
                            150 hits for social sciences, whereas if the search is refined to arts
                            and humanities only, it has less than 30 results.
 Typically,
                        researchers familiar with the tools perform these analyses, posing the
                        questions and interpreting the results. In this session, we will first
                        provide a brief overview of social network analysis and related tools. Then,
                        we will focus on three examples of how we, as humanities scholars, have made
                        use of network analysis tools and techniques in our research, both to
                        illustrate the potential of these approaches, and to discuss some common
                        problems and their possible solutions.

                    
The names and affiliation of confirmed authors are as follows: 
Zoe Borovsky, Academic Technology Services and the Center for
                                Digital Humanities, University of California, Los Angeles
Wouter de Nooy, Amsterdam School of Communication Research
                                (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Loet Leydesdorff, Amsterdam School of Communication Research
                                (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Andrea Scharnhorst, Virtual Knowledge Studio of the Netherlands
                                Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences, The Netherlands
Almila Akdag Salah, Virtual Knowledge Studio of the Netherlands
                                Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences, The Netherlands

                

            
        



                    
My presentation extends Masahiro Hori’s collocational analysis of Dickens’
                        style (2004) 
Hori, M. (2004). Investigating Dickens' style, Palgrave
                            Macmillan.
 using network content analysis tools. Because DH2010
                        will be held in London, and since Hori devotes a chapter in his book to
                        Dickens’ novel, 
Bleak House
, I will focus the
                        presentation on this novel. My goals are three-fold: First, I will show how
                        network analysis provides additional insights and metrics for studying the
                        collocational patterns in texts. Secondly, I will demonstrate how this
                        analysis provides new insights into the gender issues in Dickens’ novel.
                        Finally, I will extend my analysis to the field of Digital Humanities and
                        reflect on how it, too, can be read as a “double-narrative” with a deep
                        structure similar to the one Dickens depicts in 
Bleak
                            House
.

                    
 Network Analysis has been applied to many different types of systems:
                        sociological, biological, ecological, as well as the Internet. In addition,
                        human language has been examined for evidence of network behavior—the laws
                        that have been shown to govern other complex systems. Beginning with the
                        2001 publication of “The Small World of Human Language”.
Cancho, R.F.I.
                            & Solé, R.V. (2001). The Small World of Human Language. Proceedings
                            of the Royal Society of London. Series b, biological sciences, 268,
                            2261--2266.
 I will present a brief overview of scholarship on
                        network analysis to provide some background. Typically, humanities scholars
                        have used network analysis to model networks described in texts (e.g. the
                        characters in Shakespeare’s plays).
Stiller, J., Nettle, D. &
                            Dunbar, R. (2003). The small world of Shakespeare’s plays. Human Nature,
                            14(4): 397-408.
 However, the main purpose of this paper is to
                        demonstrate the implications of these more theoretical studies upon text
                        analysis.

                    
 Having provided the context for my analysis, I will show how
                            Wordij,
Danowski, J., WORDij, Chicago: University of Illinois at
                            Chicago. Available at: 
 a suite
                        of network content analysis tools designed to analyze unstructured texts,
                        can be used to extend Hori’s analysis of the collocates
Collocates, or
                            word-pairs, have been defined and analyzed in various ways. Hori
                            provides a useful short history in his book. Wordij generates collocates
                            or pairs of words that occur within a user-specified span of surrounding
                            text. See Danowski, J. (2009). Network analysis of message content. In
                            Krippendorff, K & Bock, M. (eds), The content analysis reader. Sage
                            Publications, pp. 421-430 for a detailed description of how Wordij
                            generates and ranks collocates.
 of the two narrators in Dickens’
                        text. Against the prevailing view that the first-person narrative of the
                        central female character, Esther, is plain and boring, Hori compares the
                        unusual collocates of both narrators. His careful analysis reveals that
                        Esther’s narrative is “linguistically experimental and satisfactorily
                        creative” (Hori 2004, p. 206). My analysis builds upon Hori’s and
                        illustrates that through the course of the novel, the narrative of the
                        anonymous third-person narrator becomes “tainted” with collocates that have
                        led scholars to judge Esther’s narrative as overly sentimental and
                        boring.

                    
 Because Wordij allows us to analyze texts as a network, with links created
                        between collocates, we can use it to calculate the distance between concepts
                        that are connected through other links. Using the network diagrams produced
                        from collocates of both these narrative sections, I will demonstrate how
                        this type of “semantic map” can be used to compare the distance between
                        words. As examples, I compare the distance between the words “man” and
                        “woman” in each narrator’s section. Opticomm (one of the programs in Wordij)
                        measures the distance between nodes (the words) by counting the number of
                        links between words and calculating the distance or path and the average
                        pair frequency.

                    

                    
 For example, one of the shortest paths from the word “man” to “woman” in
                        Esther’s text takes the following route:
                            man
→
said
→
woman. Opticomm
                        calculates the “distance” using the frequency of the pairs. The pair
                            “man
→
said” occurs 27 times (1/27 = .0370), and the
                        pair “said
→
woman” occurs 19 times (1/19 =.0526). The sum
                        of the distances equals .0897. The average pair frequency of the path is
                        low: 23. A higher frequency path takes advantage of more frequently used
                        pairs. One of the “hubs” (a word that has many connections) in Esther’s
                        narrative is the word “little”. By adding the word “little” to the path
                            (man
→
said
→
little
→
woman), the
                        distance between “man” and “woman” becomes shorter (.0673) and more frequent
                        (53.6667) [See Figure 1]. 


                    

                        
Figure 1: Network of collocates of Esther's narrative, Dickens,
                                Bleak House. Visualization is created with NetDraw 2.087 using
                                collocates and distances generated with Wordij. Frequencies of the
                                pairs (shown by weighted lines) are greater than or equal to
                                18.
                        
                    

                    
The results of this analysis show how the third-person narrator’s change in
                        style (employing collocate patterns used in Esther’s text) reflects and
                        mirrors the character development in the novel—the rezoning of the
                        hyper-masculine characters: Sir Leicester Dedlock and Mr. George. I will
                        argue that the deep structure of the novel hinges on this “rezoning” of the
                        masculine-- a plot structure that is remarkably similar to the occult horror
                        films analyzed by Carol Clover in her book: 
Men, Women and
                            Chainsaws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film
.
Clover, C.J.
                            (1993). Men, Women, and Chain Saws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film.
                            Princeton University Press.
 Like occult films, I will present
                        that the aim of Bleak House is a reconstruction of the masculine, a process
                        that typically takes place almost invisibly, as the texts foregrounds the
                        excesses of the female characters. Thus the narrative technique, one that
                        “opens up” to the sentimental expressions characteristic of Esther’s
                        narrative, reflects the deep-structure “rezoning” on the periphery of Bleak
                        House; George’s Shooting Gallery and Sir Leicester’s Chesney Wold are
                        radically transformed in the novel.

                    
Finally, I will draw comparisons between the cultural conditions that evoke
                        these types of structures and double narratives, and reflect on how the
                        field of Digital Humanities can be read in this light. Scholarship in
                        Digital Humanities is a “double-narrative” brought about by the rezoning of
                        hard and soft sciences, a project similar to the reconstruction undertaken
                        by Dickens’ 
Bleak House
.


                

            
        

                    

                    
 Relations and structure play an important role in the humanities. Language
                        is structured at the word, sentence, text levels, and beyond. Literary texts
                        contain implicit references to one another and artists are linked by lines
                        of influence or artistic descent. In some branches of structuralism, meaning
                        is inextricably intertwined with the relations among linguistic elements
                        (signifiers). In this paper, I extend the idea that structure is the carrier
                        of meaning to stories. I submit that story structure conveys meaning.
                        Patterns of interactions among the characters of a story are meaningful in
                        the sense that they represent roles with moral connotations.

                    
Structure quickly becomes complex if the number of elements and relations
                        increases. Then, network analysis is an indispensable tool. In a network,
                        entities such as characters in a story are represented by nodes (vertices)
                        and lines embody links between these characters. There is no limitation to
                        the kinds of links that can be represented by lines as long as each link
                        connects two entities. Durable ties, for example, family relations among
                        characters, can be expressed in this way just as easily as incidental events
                        or interactions. Lines can be symmetric, for example, being siblings, or
                        asymmetric, such as an action from one character directed towards another
                        character in the story. Lines can have attributes and they can be of
                        different kinds, for example, positive versus negative lines (this is called
                        a signed network). Finally, each line can be time-stamped to indicate the
                        onset and expiration of ties. With this formalization of structure as a
                        network, we can use computers to quickly and correctly identify structural
                        patterns. Software that is able to analyze large and complicated networks is
                        widely available.

                    
 If network analysis yields a tool for finding patterns, does it also tell us
                        which patterns to look for? In an analysis of story structure understood as
                        the interactions among characters, it makes sense to borrow from the
                        tradition of social network analysis. In this paper, I use the theory of
                        structural balance, which originated in (social) psychology and was adopted
                        in social network analysis. Based on simple premises like ‘the friend of my
                        friend is my friend,’ this theory predicts that people favour balanced
                        networks. A network is balanced if the positive (friendship) and negative
                        (antagonism) ties display specific, easily recognizable patterns.

                    
 Balance theory has been applied to the affective ties among characters in
                        stories: tales, opera, and movies. The general finding is that balance among
                        the story’s protagonists is restored at a story’s resolution. Stories
                        develop from unbalanced towards balanced networks. In this paper, I focus
                        on another important role of time. I show that the time order and direction
                        of positive and negative actions between two protagonists defines the roles
                        they play in the story. I use the seminal work of Vladímir Propp—Morphology
                        of the Folktale (1928)—which inspired most of the later work on story
                        grammars and narratology. Propp offers a concise set of propositions on the
                        basic form and plot of a corpus of Russian fairytales, distinguishing
                        between several roles of protagonists, such as the hero, the villain, and
                        the donor. I demonstrate that each role is associated with a unique sequence
                        of positive and negative actions. In other words, one can tell a fairytale
                        character’s role from the interaction sequence it is involved in.

                    
 A formal focus on structure, which is needed for computerized network
                        analysis, entails that attributes of the characters, such as a hut on
                        chicken legs indicating that a character is a witch, and detailed content of
                        interactions are not taken into account. Instead, the focus is on an
                        abstract schema that can be fleshed out in any number of ways in a story.
                        Notwithstanding their abstract character, I contend that the schemata have
                        moral implications. Attacking the story’s hero out of the blue, which is a
                        characteristic of the structural pattern associated with the villain, has a
                        negative moral connotation, which is also linked to the last step in the
                        villain’s structural pattern, namely that the villain is defeated by the
                        hero at the end of the story. Undesirable properties of the villain, such as
                        ugliness, may help to reinforce the moral depreciation of the role but they
                        are not essential to it.

                    
Tales and other stories socialize children into a culture of appreciating
                        some sequences of interaction and depreciating other sequences. Authors may
                        play with these conventions by combining structural role patterns with
                        attributes of the character that are usually associated with other roles. In
                        a more fundamental way, authors may turn structural patterns upside down,
                        for example, a woman accepting to live with the man who raped her (a typical
                        villain role) in Coetzee’s Disgrace or the protagonist in Houellebecq’s
                        Elementary Particles, who turns his back on his most important ‘donor.’
                        Fairy tale structure is probably quite straightforward in comparison to
                        stories read by adults. A systematic analysis of more complicated stories
                        requires formal network analysis and so does the detection of conventional
                        role patterns in sets of stories, differences in this regard between story
                        genres, and development over time.

                    
 If the role patterns in stories are instruments of socialization, we may
                        expect to find them in real-life interactions. Because role patterns and
                        network analysis are purely structural, it is straightforward to compare the
                        structure of interactions within stories to interactions among humans. In
                        this paper, I will apply network analysis to evaluations among a set of
                        literary authors and critics to show that fairytale roles can be
                        distinguished and help to explain what happens. In this way, the social
                        sciences benefit from the analysis of story structure just like social
                        theory and social network analysis may advance the analysis of story
                        structure.

                

            

        


                    
 In this paper, we propose novel ways of charting out activity in digital
                        humanities research. In particular, we apply a combination of classic
                        bibliometric analysis
‘Scientometrics’ or ‘bibliometrics’ is a research
                            venue specialized in evaluating growth, relations and interactions in
                            scientific fields with the help of citation data collected above all
                            from journal papers. Scientometrics is traced back to the beginnings of the
                            1900s, but the more official start can be settled to 1964, when Garfield
                            founded Institute for Scientific Information; today it is a product of
                            Thompson ISI and called Web of Science. From the 80’s onwards, the research in
                            this area accelerated with the advancement of computers and various
                            combinations of statistical methods used to extract and evaluate
                            information such as citations, cocitations with reference of various
                            bibliometric data. The end-results are usually rendered as so-called
                            ‘citation networks’ which are a variation of social networks. Now it is
                            a common practice to evaluate a scholar or a journal according to how
                            many times it/he/she is cited. To read more on the history of
                            scientometrics see Katy Börner, Jeegar T. Marus, and Robert L.
                            Goldstone. (2004). The Simultaneous Evolution Of Author And Paper
                            Networks, PNAS 101 (suppl.1): 5266-5273. For more information on
                            citation networks, please see Doreian Patrick. (1985). A Measure Of
                            Standing Of Journals in Stratified Networks. Journal of the American
                            Society for lnformation Science, 8(5/6): 341-363. For a critique of
                            bibliometric analysis see Lindsey D. (1989). Using Citation Counts As A
                            Measure Of Quality In Science Measuring What's Measurable Rather Than
                            What's Valid., Scientometrics, Vol. 15, No 3-4: 189-203; Leydesdorff L.
                            (2006). Can Scientific Journals Be Classified in Terms of Aggregated
                            Journal-Journal Citation Relations Using the Journal Citation Reports?
                            Journal Of The American Society For Information Science And
                            Technology—March: 601-614.
 focusing on citation patterns and a
                        broader text and actor network analysis based on various data sets collected
                        from different sources, such as standardized scientific information
                        databases and web data in general.

                    
"Digital humanities" is the latest term for "humanities computing", almost a
                        century old enterprise that made use of computational methods and tools in
                        humanities research. Today, this enterprise has become a hot topic supported
                        by significant government funding agencies like National Endowment in
                        Humanities (NEH) in the United States
NEH has an office dedicated for
                            Digital Humanities research: 
 and the European Framework programs of EU.
One of the FP7
                            projects is titled PREPARINGDARIAH (Preparing for the construction of
                            the Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities) and is
                            devoted to enriching DH: 
 The
                        topic attracts attention from scholars coming from a wide range of
                        disciplines like computer science and art history, and its future is the
                        focus of a heated debate on certain weblogs dedicated to this research
                        initiative. Depending on the research environment, the idea of Digital
                        Humanities (DH) is envisioned in diverse ways; some research institutes or
                        universities view it as a methodology, others incorporate it into their
                        research agendas as a tool for analysis. Others view it as a discourse,
                        investigating how knowledge is produced with new media technologies, while
                        at the same time making use of these technologies in humanities research
                        itself.

                    
Usually, the applications and methodology of DH ask for a collaborative
                        commission, and these interdisciplinary collaborations forge beneficial
                        links that enable the use of technological tools in a way to serve
                        humanities research questions. However, recent findings (Leydesdorff &
                        Akdag Salah, in preparation)
Leydesdorff L., Akdag Salah, A.
                            (forthcoming). Maps on the basis of the Arts & Humanities Citation
                            Index: the journals Leonardo and Art Journal¸ and “Digital Humanities”
                            as a topic, Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
                            Technology, available at 
 show that
                        the scholarly activities around DH are less broad than one could expect. One
                        might even say that DH falls short of reaching out to an interdisciplinary
                        audience. A bibliometric study of the citation patterns of papers that are
                        tagged in Web of Science’s all three databases under the topic of "digital
                        humanities" reveals that the knowledge base of DH is confined to two groups
                        of journals, namely the ones that are dedicated to humanities computing, and
                        the others dealing with library and information sciences (see Figures 1
                        & 2). This outcome should not be surprising, as research in the arena of
                        humanities computing was centered upon text mining and analysis of
                        humanities literature, and the publication of these research results were
                        confined to specialized journals such as Humanities Computing. Beside text
                        analysis, a main focus of DH activities was the digitization of archives and
                        libraries, hence the second group of journals are specialized in this area. 



                    

                        
Figure 1: Journal co-citation patterns of 33 documents citing
                                46 documents about “Digital Humanities” in 2008; threshold 0.5%;
                                cosine ≥ 0.0; N = 15, from Leydesdorff & Akdag Salah
                                (forthcoming).
                        
                        
Figure 2: k-core group of 36 journals bibliographically coupled
                                in 46 documents about “digital humanities”; threshold 0.5%; cosine >
                                0.2, from Leydesdorff & Akdag Salah (forthcoming).
                        
                    

                    
Currently, it is not clear whether DH is in the first formations of either
                        becoming a discipline on its own, or whether it will become merged into the
                        infrastructure of future humanities departments by offering a platform for
                        collaborative research environment enriched by media technologies of today.
                        In either case, our initial findings on DH’s position and its present
                        inability to reach an interdisciplinary audience led us to conclude that
                        policy makers and scholars, both of whom contribute to the development of DH
                        could benefit from an expansion of our analysis.

                    
We assume that DH activities that are very innovative and still in an
                        emergent state might not be fully reflected by the journals sampled in 
Web of Science
. We furthermore suppose that a more
                        in-depth analysis that goes beyond journal-journal citation networks will
                        reveal interesting patterns. We will present the results of a social network
                        analysis and a semantic map of DH based on a dataset extracted from papers
                        published on leading DH journals such as 
Humanities
                            Computing
, 
Calica
, 
Literary and Linguistic Computing
, as well as papers retrieved
                        from online publication venues such as 
Text
                            Technology
, 
Digital Studies
, 
Digital Medievalist
. We believe that online journals
                        will alter the recent findings of the knowledge dissemination of DH to a
                        considerable extend. Here one should not be limited with classical database
                        providers like 
Web of Science
 or 
Scopus
, but also make full use of Google Scholar search-engine.
                        Even then, a bibliometric study of the topic confined to journal-journal
                        citation maps will not deliver a complete picture of the flux of DH. To
                        capture this change and the debate around it, we propose a methodology that
                        will incorporate different type of social networks in rendering and
                        interpreting this new research area.

                    
 DH scholars can use virtual research environments for collaboration and
                        production of knowledge, as well as for publication of their results. Hence,
                        information retrieval from online communities, mailing lists, discussion
                        forums and blogs dedicated to DH research is crucial for understanding the
                        state of the art in projects, programs, and research done in the name of DH.
                        A social network based on the shared keywords of such a dataset reveals what
                        topics are of recent interest to DH scholars. Furthermore, this dataset is
                        used in preparing a second network that shows the links of websites and
                        blogs (in and out), which facilitates the drawing of information flow inside
                        DH community, as well the community's relation to other scholarly
                        communities.

                    
 A very interesting extension is a map that depicts the connection between
                        institutions and the resources they draw upon. As we have already mentioned,
                        the structural formation of DH is different in every institution. Thus,
                        every DH research environment is built on different premises, and the
                        development of each of these settings is mainly based on internal resources
                        (which are usually delivered in terms of equipment or the availability of
                        technical staff and scholars) and on external support (governmental or
                        private agencies). Today, when the main attention of DH scholars are on
                        combining their past experience and their ideas about DH to create a better
                        platform for humanities departments in general, to depict the flow of
                        resources, financial and otherwise, is as vital as following the flow of
                        information in DH. 


                


            

        