
                
It was not until the beginning of World War II that Dr. Tadao Yamamoto first
                    established a plan for the compilation of the 
Dickens
                        Lexicon
 in his mind; the earliest plan of which was suggested in 
Studies in English Literature
 (Vol. XIII, No. 3, 1943).
                    As the war situation turned progressively worse, the completion of the Lexicon
                    was left to future efforts. He decided, however, to make an
                    "Introduction" to it in the early spring of 1944, and in the same year
                    presented it as a doctoral thesis to the University of Tokyo under the title of
                        
Growth and System of the Language of Dickens: An
                        Introduction to A Dickens Lexicon
, for which he obtained the degree of
                    Doctor of Literature from the University in 1946. The dissertation was first
                    published in 1950 by Kansai University Press through the generous efforts of the
                    late Professor Jiichi Hattori at Kansai University, and with financial support
                    from the English Philological Society of Kansai University. In 1953 he was
                    awarded the Japan Academy Prize for this book. The second edition and "An
                    index to Tadao Yamamoto’s 
Growth and system of the Language of
                        Dickens
: With supplementary notes & corrections" were
                    published separately by the same press in 1952. The third revised edition was
                    published by Keisuisha Publishing Company in 2003.

                
In 1948 Dr. Yamamoto organised the first joint research for the compilation of
                        
A Dickens Lexicon
, which was granted a Government
                    Subsidy for Scientific Research by the Department of Education for 1948. The
                    members of the joint research mainly consisted of his pupils in Hiroshima
                    University of Literature and Science. The members chose one of Dickens’ works
                    and collected the materials for the 
Lexicon
. The
                    participants and their selected works are as follows:

                

                    
Tadao Yamamoto
Oliver Twist
Michio Masui
Bleak House
Chiaki Higashida
A Tale of Two Cities
Tamotsu Kurose
Christmas Books
Hiroshige Yoshida
Nicholas Nickleby
Masami Tanabe
Old Curiosity Shop
After he moved to Osaka Women’s University in 1952, Yamamoto organised the second
                    joint research for the compilation of the 
Dickens
                    Lexicon
; the members of which included Michio Masui, Chiaki Higashida,
                    Tamotsu Kurose, Haruo Kouzu, Yasuo Yoshida, Tadahisa Goto, Jun Matsumoto,
                    Tamotsu Matsunami, Hideo Hirooka, and Michio Kawai. The joint research was
                    granted a Subsidy for Government Scientific Research by the Department of
                    Education for 1952. The process and result of it were reported in 
Anglica
 (1954: 438-9) as follows:

                
As a preliminary work for the compilation of the 
Dickens
                        Lexicon
 we aimed at establishing the working principles of selecting
                    materials for our research. For this purpose each of the members chose one of
                    Dickens’ writings from which necessary materials should be extracted. It was
                    desired that each participant should at the outset prepare explanatory notes to
                    the work chosen and as the next step offer slips of quotations under separate
                    items with comments if necessary.

                

                    
Sketches by Boz
 (B) 
Matsunami
Pickwick Papers
 (P) 
Matsumoto
Christmas Carol 
(Carol) 
Kurose
Martin Chuzzlewit
 (MC) 
Masui
Cricket on the Hearth
 (Cricket)
Goto
Dombey and Son
 (DS) 
Higashida
David Copperfield 
(DC) 
Yoshida
A Tale of Two Cities
 (TC) 
Imagawa
Great Expectations
 (GE) 
Ishino
Separately the present writer has prepared a collection of detailed notes to 
Oliver Twist
 (OT), with which materials chosen out of the
                    above works are to be collated.

                
Slips collected amount to 6504, from which 2915 have been sifted and adopted for
                    the present research. They may be roughly classified as follows: 
01.
Names and subjects
472
02.
Word-forms
152
03.
Slang and dialects
388
04.
Quotations and allusions
256
05.
Expressions coming from some definite situations or
                                surroundings
337
06.
Phrasal expressions
200
07.
Exclamations, asseverations, swearing, &c. 
174
08.
Intensive expressions
88
09.
Precise and energetic expressions
73
10.
Those with bodily names
31
11.
Miscellaneous
519
12.
Words and phrases particularly collated with the notes to Oliver
                                Twist
225
Sum total
2915
In Yamamoto’s conclusion, he commented on the limitations and difficulties of
                    this joint research as follows:

                
"... as a joint work ours for this time has remained at the very tentative stage.
                    It has taught us that the desideratum is a perfect team-work with sufficient
                    preparation and training that cost us an enormous amount of time and labour.
                    With all our efforts, however, we must admit that we continually suffer from the
                    considerable limitation of our knowledge, and under the present conditions there
                    are insurmountable difficulties in having access to each and every requisite
                    source of information. It would indeed be a consummation devoutly to be wished
                    if we could come directly in touch, not exclusively through the narrow channel
                    of written sources now at our disposal, with all things that have conspired to
                    create Dickens and his language." (451)

                
The research team was, however, broken up, and a new downsized one was organised.
                    Its members were Chiaki Higashida, Yasuo Yoshida, Jun Matsumoto, and Shigekiyo
                    Kawahara. The result was published in 
Dickens no Buntai

                        (
Dickens’ Style
 in English) from Nan’un-do in 1960,
                    but this joint research did not bear fruit either. From that time Yamamoto began
                    to collect the materials for the 
Dickens Lexicon
 once
                    again from 
Pickwick Papers
 all by himself, but
                    unfortunately on the 28th of July in 1991, he died without seeing it
                    accomplished. 

                
This poster session is an interim report on the 
Dickens
                        Lexicon
 project, which was newly organized in 1998 by a research group
                    of twenty scholars whose ultimate aim has been to compile the 
Dickens Lexicon
 from approximately 60,000 cards, which Dr. Tadao
                    Yamamoto (1904-91) elaborately drew up and left to us. The Dickens Lexicon is
                    expected to be released as the "Dickens Lexicon Online" on an Internet
                    website with a multifunctional search engine, in the near future. This poster
                    session provides an introduction to the 
Dickens Lexicon

                    project, including its practical use for research.

                
The 
Dickens Lexicon
 is designed as a web-based reference
                    resource. Users will be able to search and retrieve lexical data (an idiom, its
                    word class, definition, source, and quotation), stored in the original card
                    database of approximately 60,000 indexed entries without installing extra
                    software (apart from a web browser) on their computers. The lexicon will also be
                    implemented with a multifunctional information retrieval system. In addition to
                    the indexed entries, the lexicon will make it possible to retrieve frequency
                    information on lexical items (from single words to phrases, including multi-word
                    units) drawing upon the full corpus of Dickens’ texts and an additional set of
                    major 18th and 19th century fictional texts. A range of functions such as
                    concordance display, sort capability, and distribution chart will be available
                    in a user-friendly interface. Therefore, a close scrutiny of idioms appearing in
                    the Dickens Lexicon with a multifunctional information retrieval system will not
                    only make us aware of the ways idioms provided an important characteristic in
                    Dickens’ usage of English, compared with those in other major 18th and 19th
                    century fictional texts, but will also provide insights into the characteristic
                    structure of idiomaticity in the English language as well. 

            

        
        

                
Yamamoto, Tadao 
1950 [2003]
Growth and System of the Language of Dickens: An
                            Introduction to A Dickens Lexicon
Keisuisha
Hiroshina, Japan

        