
                
                
One of the key problems facing digital humanities today is the increasing
                    number and size of digital repositories and the relative lack of tools
                    for studying them. A collection of a million books (Crane, 2006) is no 
                    more useful than a collection of ten thousand if you can't read more than a
                    hundred of them in a realistic timeframe. Scholars like Moretti (2005)
                    have proposed a new analysis method, termed "distant reading," to enable
                    computer-aided large-scale analysis of such collections. In previous
                    work (Juola and Bernola, 2009), we have proposed using a
                    conjecture generator (Conjecturator,
                    see also 
http://www.twitter.com/conjecturator
) as another computer-aided
                    analysis method.

                    
                    
Underlying the Conjecturator is the idea that the the computer can be deployed 
                    to autonomously generate "facts" about a given text repository. Like its 
                    predecessor and inspiration 
Graffiti
 (Fajtlowicz, 1988),
                    the conjecturator generates template-based "conjectures" that might or 
                    might not be true about the repository and the texts in it. A sample 
                    conjecture might be something like:
                    
                        
The concept of "archivist" appears more in mid-Victorian novels than in 
                                psychological realism novels or, more obviously,
The concept of "femininity" appears more in feminist novels than in novels
                                with gothic elements. 

                                       
                    (Who would have thought, eh?)

                    
                    
As discussed in (Juola and Bernola, 2009), these simple conjectures can
                    be easily and quickly tested to refute or confirm their validity.  This
                    enables the computer to quickly generate a pile of isolated "facts" about 
                    the text repository, but does not provide a useful framework for
                    interpretation, explanation, or understanding (which still requires human
                    expertise).

                    
                    
However, this "pile of facts" can provide useful source material for
                    distant reading. In this paper, we demonstrate one way to extend this
                    conjecture-based analysis to a large-scale "distant reading" and
                    visualization of genre differences. Repeated generation of conjectures
                    will create a large catalogue of potential differences between any
                    particular category pair, some true/supported, and some false. 
                    The number of "true" differences, or alternatively, the percentage of
                    true differences, can be viewed as a distance between the categories,
                    a distance measuring the degree of difference between the concepts
                    commonly written about in those genres.  If, for instance, "epistolary
                    novels" differ in 26 significant ways from "tragic novels", but only
                    in one significant way from "fiction of manners," we can consider
                    "epistolary novels" to be a closer genre in terms of expressed concepts
                    to "fiction of manners" than to "tragic novels." This high-order analysis
                    gives us a large-scale conceptual grouping of genre categories.

                    
                    
To aid in the study of such differences, we compile the differences into a
                    matrix and apply multidimensional scaling (MDS) (Cox and Cox, 2001). This
                    statistical technique takes a high-dimensional data set defined by interpoint
                    distances and embeds/rescales it to fit a smaller number of
                    dimensions (in this case, two) while minimizing distortion. The resulting
                    two-dimensional coordinates can be plotted to give a visual "map" of the
                    space of genres. We demonstrate this technique using an enlarged set
                    of 136 novels representing 36 genres (including time period and authorial
                    attributes as "genres") and approximately 10,000 validated conjectures (culled
                    from approximately 85,000 conjectures in total).

                    
                    
The resulting images clearly indicate that this method is a new and viable way
                    of performing large-scale distant reading.  As can be seen in Figure 1, the resulting "map" passes many obvious tests for rationality; for
                    for example, mid-Victorian novels represent an intermediate stage between 
                    early and late Victorian novels; similarly, "male authored novels" in
                    general are an intermediate between "American male authored novels" and
                    "English male authored novels," reflected exactly what intuition suggests.
                    We leave it to genre specialists to examine the map in detail and to see
                    whether actual genres equally reflect our intuitions. It is easy and relatively
                    efficient to apply and almost entirely document-agnostic; it can be applied
                    as easily to journal articles (and map the space of scholarship) or to
                    newspaper corpora (perhaps mapping the space of editorial policies and
                    politics) as to novel genres.

                
                
Figure 1
                    

            
        
        

                

                            Cox, T.F., Cox, M.A.A.
2001
Multidimensional Scaling
Chapman and Hall
Crane, Gregory
2006
What Do You Do With a Million Books?
D-Lib Magazine
12(3)
Fajtlowicz, Siemion
1988
On conjectures of Graffiti
Discrete Mathematics
72
Juola, Patrick
2009
Mapping Genre Space via Random Conjectures
Presented at DHCS-2009, IIT
Chicago, IL
Juola, Patrick, Bernola, Ashley
2009
Conjecture Generation in the Digital Humanities
Proc. DH-2009
2009
Moretti, Franco
2005
Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History
Verso

        