
                
When Jonathan Larson, author of the hit Broadway musical 
RENT
, died in 1996 just before his work opened off-Broadway, he left
                    behind about 180 floppy disks containing, among other things, drafts of the
                    musical composed over a period of about six years. These disks, which were
                    donated to the Library of Congress and are now held there, represent one of the
                    earliest examples of a "hybrid archive" - a collection of both paper
                    and inextricably digital artifacts. Along with a series of timestamped Microsoft
                    Word 5.1 documents, the disks also preserve early and transitional versions of
                    the music in MIDI and MOTU Performer format that could not easily be transferred
                    to a more traditional medium without significant loss. In this poster I show
                    some of what I found on these disks, what it reveals about the creative
                    processes that shaped 
RENT
, and, more generally, how the
                    lessons learned in my experience might be applied by others working with hybrid
                    archives. 

                
The earliest file on the Library of Congress disks relating to 
RENT
 is a version of the music for the title song timestamped 1:37
                    p.m. on December 21, 1989 and created with the musical editing program Performer
                    (now called Digital Performer). Accessing this file was not an easy matter. I
                    had planned to create an image of the disks using the "dd" disk
                    imaging command built into most versions of Linux, but, unfortunately, the disks
                    were formatted in the 800K HFS disk format and could not be natively read by a
                    "modern" floppy drive. I therefore used a live CD install of Ubuntu
                    5.02 running on a Powerbook G3 to create the image. Of course, if I had not had
                    access to this Powerbook, things would have been slightly more complicated. I
                    could, perhaps, have brought a desktop with a third party floppy controller card
                    (such as the Catweasel PCI card manufactured by Individual Computers), but
                    getting such a bulky machine to the Library of Congress and through the airport
                    level security would have been difficult. The Powerbook was an indispensible
                    tool and well worth an eBay purchase for those doing similar work. Once the disk
                    image was created I made a second working copy, mounted it on Mac OS X (the
                    current version of the operating system still supports disk images in legacy
                    formats) and used a modern version of Digital Performer to open the file. 

                
Note, however, that this digital file is not the earliest draft of 
RENT
 in the Library of Congress collection. There is a
                    paper copy of the script that was probably written in mid-1989 by Larson's
                    collaborator Billy Aronson. The draft is an 11 page, typescript that appears to
                    have been produced on Aronson's letter-quality NEC printer. The draft is
                    labeled "pre-lyric" and, true to this label, contains no songs but
                    does include some relatively lyrical language (especially by Mimi who has lines
                    like: "I embroider sunsets onto pillowcases. Well, now you know...").
                    The second draft in the collection, again paper and probably produced by the
                    same typewriter used to produce the pre-lyric draft is labeled
                    "Boheme" and dated 9/22/89. It assigns sole responsibility for the
                    book and lyrics to Billy Aronson and the music to Larson and was, again, likely
                    typed by Aronson. Most of the songs in this draft did not make it to the final
                    version of the show, however the draft does contain versions of the songs
                    "Rent" and "I Should Tell You" and, in more or less the form
                    it is now known, "Santa Fe" (indeed, the program notes for 
RENT
 always credit Aronson for his work on these songs). 

                
Although the broad details of the narrative that begins to emerge from this
                    archive are well known (Billy Aronson and Jonathan Larson decided to collaborate
                    on the musical, Larson initially only as composer, and together wrote three
                    songs before going their separate ways), the digital and paper artifacts
                    together fill out the story with precise and fascinating detail. For instance,
                    although Larson probably received a script from Aronson by September (based on
                    the date on the first script in the collection) and by November at latest
                    (interleaved into the second draft is a letter from Aronson to Larson dated 12/1
                    which Aronson begins with the words "Here's the new last chorus for
                    SANTA FE that you asked for"), Larson did not commit any work on the show
                    to disk until December 21. The letter from Aronson indicates that Larson was
                    probably working on the show before then, but likely recording his work, if at
                    all, to analog media (perhaps, as he certainly did in other cases, to a cassette
                    tape). However, in order to transcribe the music to digital format Larson
                    required technology he did not have at home. Another Word Document on the disks
                    dated 1/31/90 and named "STUDIO COSTS" appears to have been a kind of
                    invoice to Aronson. It lists three studio visits, one for 6 hours on December 21
                    to create "Music Trax for SANTA FE & RENT," one for 4.5 hours on
                    January 16 to create "Music Trax for I SHOULD TELL YOU" and one for
                    7.5 hours on January 30 to "Record Vocals for ALL SONGS" and to create
                    "Mix Trax for ALL SONGS." That Larson sought out a digital studio so
                    early in the creative process (and was willing to pay about $300 per session at
                    a time when his primary source of income was part-time work at a diner) suggests
                    how important Larson saw digital technology for his creative process. To truly
                    understand 
RENT
, then, the scholar must understand the
                    digital technologies and processes used to create it. The textual critic of 
RENT
 and other born digital musicals must therefore be
                    skilled in recovering, reading, and analyzing digital artifacts - the processes
                    I hope to demonstrate in this introduction to my work with 
RENT
. 

            

        
        

    