As more people rely on computer technologies to conduct their personal and
                        professional lives, born-digital materials such as emails, Word manuscripts
                        with tracked changes, blog entries, text messages, and tweets will
                        constitute the archives of the future. Archival repositories at places like
                        Stanford University, Emory University, and The University of Texas at Austin
                        have been receiving born-digital materials for over 20 years but have only
                        recently begun working actively to preserve these items in their original
                        digital formats.

                    
As part of this work, archivists have begun to look to other fields, such as
                        computer forensics and law enforcement, for equipment and methodologies to
                        use in the acquisition and preservation of born-digital materials. The
                        application of forensics technology to born-digital content in archives and
                        the development of tools to facilitate access to these materials hold great
                        promise for humanities scholarship and teaching. 

                    
This session brings together digital archivists, librarians, and curators to
                        discuss some of the forensic techniques and equipment being used to preserve
                        born-digital archival materials at the Stanford University Libraries, the
                        researcher interfaces Emory University has developed to provide access to
                        Salman Rushdie’s computers, and the broader implications of these
                        developments for the concept of “archives” in a variety of disciplines,
                        including information science, literary studies, history, and cultural
                        studies.

                    
 Michael Olson, Digital Collections Project Manager for Stanford University
                        Libraries, will begin the session with a discussion of the applicability of
                        forensics software to the acquisition and description of born-digital
                        archival materials at Stanford. Erika Farr, Director of Born-Digital
                        Initiatives at Emory’s Woodruff Library, will discuss the researcher
                        interfaces developed for use with Salman Rushdie’s computers and the results
                        of user studies currently underway to explore the potential effects of
                        analog-digital hybrid materials on research methodologies and scholarly
                        communication. Gabriela Redwine, Archivist and Electronic Records/Metadata
                        Specialist at the Harry Ransom Center, will consider the computer as an
                        archival object that challenges both archival and scholarly notions of what
                        an archives is and can be, as well as the functions it may serve. 

                
The panel will be chaired by Gabriela Redwine, of the Harry Ransom Center, The University of Texas at Austin. Matthew Kirschenbaum, Associate Director of the
                        Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH), will
                        serve as respondent.

            
        
Stanford University Libraries hold an increasing amount of digital archival
                        material. This principally comprises magnetic and optical disks and tapes
                        containing digital files produced both via historical computing platforms on
                        legacy media, as well as via contemporary applications on modern media.
                        Analysis of recent acquisitions from the last five years has shown a
                        five-fold increase in the number of collections containing digital archival
                        materials. Without near-term action, these materials are at the greatest
                        risk of loss and are likely to disappear from the corpus of primary source
                        materials. The imminent loss of digital archival materials now confronts
                        curators, digital archivists, and researchers who desire to use and preserve
                        these digital records.

                    
 Computing forensics is a discipline that is still very much dominated by the
                        law enforcement community and the need for digital evidence that can be
                        verified in a court of law. It is based on the following core principles:
                        “that evidence should not be altered, examination results should be
                        accurate, and that examination results are verifiable and repeatable”
                        (Pollitt, 1995). These same principles translate to the archival world,
                        where provenance or verifiable custody is a foundation of archival theory.
                        Curators, digital archivists and researchers have the same requirement that
                        documents, whether in an analogue or digital format, be verifiable. 

                    
 Digital investigations, both criminal and commercial, have driven the
                        development of forensic software tools and training. Commercially produced
                        forensic software and training certification programs are almost universally
                        adopted by law enforcement agencies. Open-source software for the capture
                        and analysis of digital archival materials is available as an alternative,
                        but there is even less data on how these tools work or could be used in the
                        archival field.

                    
 Beginning in early 2009, staff from Stanford’s Digital Libraries Systems and
                        Services group met with our archivists to assess the preservation and access
                        needs for digital archival materials. Out of these discussions at-risk
                        collections were identified and it was determined that our highest priority
                        was to safely migrate these collections off at-risk media in a forensically
                        sound manner. Our greatest concern was that the floppy disks, magnetic
                        tapes, and hard drives in our collections would degrade before we could
                        develop a comprehensive program to both preserve and make these materials
                        available to researchers. A second priority was to acquire software tools
                        that would allow our archivists to assess the contents of digital materials
                        and develop methods for making them available. 

                    
 Alongside this priority-setting exercise, Stanford sought advice from the
                        participants at the British Library’s Digital Lives Conference. Jeremy
                        Leighton John at the British Library and staff from the Paradigm Project
                        (co-directed by Oxford and Manchester) were particularly helpful in
                        providing their expertise and a list of potentially useful hardware and
                        software (Paradigm, 2005-7). Following up on this advice Stanford began an
                        intensive discussion with multiple forensic vendors that currently supply
                        and train many law enforcement agencies in the United States. These
                        discussions were notable by the surprise many forensic firms expressed when
                        presented with our archival needs; law enforcement is clearly driving the
                        market for forensic hardware and software. 

                    
 In the summer of 2009, Stanford University Libraries acquired a suite of
                        forensic hardware and software and has undertaken an extensive program to
                        test a wide range of commercial and open-source forensic software
                        applications and evaluate which applications are most appropriate for use by
                        our curatorial staff, digital archivist, and donors. This paper summarizes
                        our experience in evaluating our academic archiving needs against the range
                        of commercial and open-source forensic software applications. It is
                        important to note that our findings are not scientific product evaluations.
                        The results provided in this paper merely reflect our own experience using
                        these different methodologies to forensically image and analyze digital
                        archival materials from the perspective of a curator, a digital archivist,
                        and a potential donor of digital archival materials. 

                    
 The results of our findings are based on the following criteria: the nature
                        of the archival collection, skills required to use the software effectively,
                        an evaluation of feature sets, potential for integration with existing
                        archival software such as the Archivists’ Toolkit, support for metadata
                        outputs and preservation services, application cost, and supported forensic
                        disk image formats. Our non-scientific evaluation includes two of the
                        largest commercial applications used by the forensic law enforcement
                        community: Guidance Software’s EnCase Forensic ™ and AccessData’s FTK
                        (Forensic Toolkit) 3.0 ™. In addition, we will include our evaluation of
                        open source software such as The Sleuth Kit and a small number of freely
                        available forensic utilities.

            
            

                    
Paradigm project
2005-7
A Proposal for Intellectual Access to Hybrid Archives.
                                Workbook on Digital Private Papers
12 November 2009
Pollitt, M. M.
1995
Principles, Practices, and Procedures: An Approach to
                                Standards in Computer Forensics
Second International Conference on
                                Computer Evidence
Baltimore, Maryland
10-15 April 1995

            
 The introduction of desktop computers, MD5 checksums, handheld devices, and
                        digital forensics into archives and special collections brings with it a
                        transformation of accessioning procedures, processing practices,
                        preservation tactics, and research service approaches. The impacts of these
                        shifts and transformations will be felt not only by archivists and
                        librarians but also by researchers and scholars.

                    
In this paper, I will discuss how the arrival of born-digital content into
                        archives has insisted on innovations in archival practice and promises to
                        bring significant change to research methodologies. As a practical, concrete
                        means of framing this discussion, I will focus on a particular case study:
                        Salman Rushdie’s hybrid “papers,” housed in Emory University’s Manuscript,
                        Archives, and Rare Book Library (MARBL). By considering the acquisition,
                        processing, and accessibility of this collection, this paper will discuss
                        the new challenges introduced to archival science by such hybrid
                        collections. More importantly for the purposes of this paper, user testing
                        and user studies currently underway on the Rushdie materials will provide
                        valuable data and insight into how hybrid collections of primary materials
                        may influence archival research habits and scholarly communication.

                    
The 2006 acquisition of Salman Rushdie’s papers, which included both
                        traditional manuscript materials and a series of personal computers,
                        provided Emory University Libraries with its first significant hybrid
                        collection of personal papers. With the exception of a few articles (e.g.
                        Thomas and Martin, 2006) and the 
Workbook on Digital
                            Private Papers
 produced by the Paradigm project (2005-7), very
                        little documentation existed to guide the staff at MARBL and in Emory’s
                        Woodruff Library in its approach to accessioning and handling these
                        materials. Early in the development of the Rushdie project and Emory’s
                        Born-Digital Archives program, the team made a commitment to approach the
                        material as holistically as possible, prioritize the integration of paper
                        and digital, and balance donor requests with researcher needs. Such a
                        philosophy prompted us to begin processing by first capturing complete disk
                        images of all five hard disks, then creating verifiable MD5 checksums, and
                        revisiting security and confidentiality concerns at virtually every
                        processing turn. Our comprehensive interest in the collection demands that
                        our development of access points and tools embrace both the digital context
                        (e.g. the operating system, original applications, original file formats)
                        and the larger context of the complete collection (e.g. paper materials and
                        finding aids). This interest in context led us to explore virtualized
                        environments as a point of access and resulted in the development of
                        researcher tools that allow concurrent exploration of emulated environments,
                        the finding aid, and item-level, database-driven searches.
In his 
Chronicle of Higher Education
 article
                            “Hamlet.doc?: Literature in a Digital Age,” Matthew Kirschenbaum’s
                            description of the rich potential of born-digital papers demonstrates
                            one example of scholarly interest in born-digital material beyond
                            discreet files.

                    
In addition to providing a greater level of detail about the early processing
                        of and planning for the Rushdie papers, this paper will also highlight
                        important early collaborations. In particular, I will discuss some of the
                        valuable insights gained while participating in an NEH Office of Digital
                        Humanities Start-up Grant with partners from the Maryland Institute for
                        Technology in the Humanities and from the Harry Ransom Center at the
                        University of Texas at Austin (see Kirschenbaum et al., 2009). This start-up
                        grant has had important influences on our program development.

                    
As this planning grant was concluding, Emory began finalizing plans for the
                        public release of Rushdie’s archive. In preparation for this major milestone
                        in February 2010, staff at MARBL and in the Digital Systems division of
                        Emory’s Woodruff Library worked diligently to process the materials in both
                        traditional and more innovative ways and to create tools, infrastructure,
                        and interfaces that will enable effective researcher access to a selection
                        of the born-digital materials as well as the finding aid for the paper
                        materials. With a completed prototype of the researcher workstation ready
                        for initial testing in early October 2009, staff undertook a cornerstone
                        piece of work for the Born-Digital Archives program: user testing. Because
                        born-digital archival content changes how researchers access and interact
                        with materials, it will necessarily result in changes in how researchers
                        undertake their work. In order to provide optimal support of and service for
                        such scholarly pursuits, archives and libraries must relentlessly explore,
                        study, and analyze researcher needs and habits. Given the current
                        transformative period in archives, it is especially important that we know,
                        even anticipate, what researchers will want to do with these materials ten,
                        twenty, even fifty years from now. 

                    
In an essay discussing researcher habits in archives, Duff and Johnson argue
                        that archives need more accurate and diverse scenarios of use in order to
                        better understand how scholars use and interact with archival material
                        (2002, p.473).
 Duff and Johnson focus on historians in this piece, but
                            their conclusions and observations pertain to humanities research more
                            broadly.
 This observed need for more data and better
                        understanding about how researchers currently use archival materials fuels
                        Emory’s interest in gathering user feedback on born-digital materials and
                        exploring effective interfaces for such collections. With this mission at
                        the program’s core, we will continue to undertake testing and user studies,
                        beginning in earnest in March 2010. Based on findings and results from these
                        studies, we will take the practical steps of revising and augmenting our
                        systems and services, as well as undertaking the slightly more theoretical
                        activity of documenting these habits in order to begin articulating shifting
                        methodologies in scholarly research.

                    
This paper will elaborate on the activity and development of Emory’s
                        Born-Digital Archives program, expound on the work involved in providing
                        researcher access to Rushdie’s hybrid collection, and introduce early
                        findings from user studies and testing on the initial set of tools produced
                        for the release of Rushdie’s hybrid archive. Discussion of these activities
                        within the framework of how hybrid collections impact research and supported
                        by data gathered during studies and testing should begin to illuminate some
                        of the ways in which research may evolve and transform in the twenty-first
                        century archive.

            
            

                    
Duff, W. M.
Johnson, C. A.
2002
Accidentally Found on Purpose: Information-Seeking
                                Behavior of Historians in Archives
Library Quarterly
72(4)
472
Kirschenbaum, M.
2007
Hamlet.doc?: Literature in a Digital Age
The Chronicle of Higher Education
53(50)
B8-9
20 October 2009
Kirschenbaum, M. et al
2009
Approaches to Managing and Collecting Born-Digital
                                Literary Materials for Scholarly Use
NEH Office of Digital Humanities
2 November 2009
Paradigm project
2005-7
A Proposal for Intellectual Access to Hybrid Archives
Workbook on Digital Private Papers
30 October 2009
Thomas, S.
Martin, J.
2006
Using the Papers of Contemporary British Politicians as
                                a Testbed for the Preservation of Digital Personal Archives
Journal of the Society of Archivists
27(1)
29-56

            
In 2009, the National Endowment for the Humanities funded a project entitled
                        “Approaches to Managing and Collecting Born-Digital Literary Materials for
                        Scholarly Use,” which supported site visits among personnel working with the
                        born-digital components of three significant collections of literary
                        materials: the Salman Rushdie Papers at Emory University, the Michael Joyce
                        Papers at the Harry Ransom Center, and the Deena Larsen Collection at the
                        Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH). In the two
                        publications emerging from that project, the grant collaborators, and
                        Matthew Kirschenbaum in particular, articulated the idea of an author’s
                        computer as what Kirschenbaum termed a “complete material and creative
                        environment”—one that an author inhabits like she would a suit of clothes,
                        or an office, or a self (Kirschenbaum et al., 2009a and b). This paper will
                        build on that understanding of the relationship between computer and author
                        to consider the ways in which the computer, as a complex archival object,
                        pushes the boundaries of traditional archival practice and also has the
                        potential to reshape the discussion of “the archive” as a subject of
                        critical inquiry. 

                    
The forensic techniques Stanford, Emory, the Ransom Center, and other
                        repositories are using to capture images of disks and hard drives offer the
                        potential for archivists to preserve and analyze more information about
                        authors’ work and lives than ever before. For example, an author’s browsing
                        history could provide insight into her online research during a particular
                        period of creativity, or the trash folder of an email account could contain
                        discarded emails important to an understanding of a particular manuscript.
                        The tools being developed as part of forensic projects like Simson
                        Garfinkel’s Real Data Corpus can be used to recover data and characterize
                        relationships between data sets. For example, it would be possible to map
                        social networks between computers and create a visualization showing which
                        authors were communicating with each other during a certain period of time.
                        This type of work could be done using hard drives residing at a single
                        repository or as part of a collaborative project across institutions. But
                        does the existence of these types of materials and the technological
                        capability to preserve and analyze them mean that archivists should? What is
                        potentially hidden or revealed when a laptop or a server-based Twitter or
                        email account is part of a collection acquired by an archival repository?
                        What ethical concerns arise around born-digital manuscript drafts deleted by
                        a creator, files “hidden” within a computing system, or correspondence that
                        exists only in the cloud? 

                    
The Society of American Archivists, North America’s oldest professional
                        association for archivists, defines an archives as a body of “materials
                        created or received by a person, family, or organization, public or private,
                        in the conduct of their affairs and preserved because of their enduring
                        value” (2005). Questions of value have long been at the center of debates
                        among archivists, scholars, activists, historians, politicians, governments,
                        and others about what gets saved, by whom, and to what end. The implications
                        of historical definitions of archives and the presumably objective role of
                        the archivist continue to inform scholarship in a variety of fields. One of
                        the most influential examples is 
Archive Fever

                        (1996), in which Jacques Derrida challenges the concept of an archive as a
                        definable entity with estimable value and an uncomplicated relationship to
                        history and memory. In the seminal essay collection 
Refiguring the Archive
 (Hamilton et al., 2002), contributors
                        ranging from Derrida to Verne Harris (Nelson Mandela’s archivist) to Achille
                        Mbembe (historian and postcolonial theorist) debate the relationship of
                        archives to memory in the context of South Africa’s social, cultural, and
                        political history. Archivists such as Michelle Light and Tom Hyry have
                        argued for greater transparency on the part of archivists and an
                        acknowledgement of the subjectivity inherent in organizational and
                        descriptive practices (2002). And scholars like Ann Cvetkovich have
                        articulated a broader understanding of the concept of an “archive,” beyond
                        the types of records and other materials found in conventional archives, to
                        include non-traditional, and often more ephemeral, representations of things
                        like memories, feelings, and lived experiences. 
Writing in
                            An Archive of Feelings
 (2003) about cultural spaces constructed
                        around sex, feeling, and trauma, Cvetkovich laments that their “lack of a
                        conventional archive so often makes them seem not to exist.” 

                    
So how might forensic technology and its affordances impact the ways in which
                        creators, archivists, and scholars perceive what information is buried or
                        accorded cultural value and whether and how to describe it? How might
                        computers, as complete material and creative environments, make it possible
                        for an individual (or a group) to generate an archives that preserves the
                        ephemeral, the transformative, the everyday, the personal, the painful, and
                        much more, in a variety of audio, visual, and textual genres? My exploration
                        of these and other questions will incorporate the work of the cultural and
                        literary theorists mentioned above, as well as more traditional archival
                        texts and definitions. This paper will consider the ways in which the
                        computer as an archival object challenges notions about the role of
                        archives, the concept of the “archive,” and the work of archivists in global
                        contemporary cultures. I will pay particular attention to the ways in which
                        global disparities in access to technology risk creating a future archive
                        that in many ways resembles the colonial archive of the past. 

              
            

                    
Archives
2005
A Glossary of Archival and Records Terminology
Society of American Archivists
9 November 2009
Cvetkovich, A.
2003
 An Archive of Feelings: Trauma, Sexuality, and Lesbian
                                Public Cultures
Durham
Duke University Press
Derrida, J.
1996
Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression
.
                                
Chicago
University of Chicago Press
Hamilton, C.
Harris,
                                V.
Taylor, J.
Pickover, M.
Reid, G.
Saleh, R.
2002
Refiguring
                                the Archive
Cape Town
David Philip Publishers
 Kirschenbaum, M., et al.
2009a
Approaches to Managing and
                                Collecting Born-Digital Literary Materials for Scholarly
                            Use
NEH Office of Digital Humanities
4 March 2010
Kirschenbaum, M., et al.
2009b
Digital Materiality: Preserving
                                Access to Computers as Complete Environments
iPres
San Francisco, CA
5-6 October 2009
Light, M.
Hyry, T.
2002
Colophons and annotations: New directions for the
                                finding aid
American Archivist
65(2)
216-230

            