Examination of the built environment is a fundamental line of humanistic inquiry
                    that shapes our understanding of diverse cultures. It is impossible to consider
                    the ancient Egyptians without immediately thinking of the pyramids or the vast
                    religious complexes of the Nile river valley. The medieval pilgrimages and the
                    modern disciplines that study them – history, literature, religion, musicology,
                    and art – are inextricably tied to the monumental Romanesque cathedrals that
                    blanket Europe. This link between humanities scholarship and the built
                    environment is unquestionable, with an inexhaustible number of examples that
                    illustrate how architecture and urban design reveal the aspirations and
                    priorities of cultures across the ages.

                
The humanistic promise of virtual reality environments created to academically
                    rigorous standards is that they would allow scholars the opportunity to explore
                    reconstructed buildings and urban spaces, recreate the experience of citizens
                    from other eras, gain insights into the material culture of past civilizations,
                    and engage formal and informal learners in ways never before possible. Within
                    these virtual spaces, students could navigate through reconstructions of
                    historic urban environments and engage with one another to build knowledge
                    through constructivist learning exercises. Beyond pedagogy, this new form of
                    academic expression would engender new forms of scholarship and publication. 

                
Seemingly, the promise of the technology is within reach. Scores of researchers
                    across the globe are hard at work on a significant – and growing – body of
                    academically generated three-dimensional content. Architects and archaeologists
                    have embraced three-dimensional computer modeling to visualize un-built
                        structures,
Pre-visualization modeling and rendering is now commonplace
                        at both the professional level and in architecture schools.

                    reconstruct cities of the past,
Computer modeling has been embraced by the
                        Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA)
                        community, with a broad range of projects that showcase computer
                        modeling.
 and explore research questions specific to a single site or
                        structure.
Research questions within the modeling environment might
                        include viewshed analysis, reconstruction alternatives, and placement of
                        statuary.
 Yet, even given all that promise and hype, two-dimensional
                    drawings and static images still dominate the research, study, and teaching
                    methods of architectural and urban form. The problem is that only a very small
                    selection of digital work has been made available to scholars, students, and the
                    general public. In part, this is because of a dearth of options for easily
                    sharing three-dimensional content. Available on-line social-networking virtual
                    worlds such as Second Life and Stanford’s Sirikata, while brilliant for avatar
                    interactions and communication, are not suited to the study of highly detailed
                    environments. The platforms for most online virtual worlds do not support the
                    ability to import or export content, thereby limiting the scope and
                    functionality of the exploration to a single platform. The strength of available
                    online mapping programs like Google Earth and Microsoft Research Maps is in
                    their ability to let users interact with rich geographical content on a global
                    scale, not their replication of the physical world and first person navigation.
                    While Google actively encourages users to create three-dimensional content with
                    its free modeling package (Sketch Up), there are extreme limitations to using
                    Google Earth for the study of the built environment. Navigation is geared
                    towards bird’s-eye examination of schematic forms, and the models that can be
                    loaded in Google Earth are, by necessity, very low resolution. When the goal is
                    to illustrate the schematic massing of a city, these limitations are acceptable,
                    but not when the goal is to understand the experience of moving through a
                    detailed world. A secondary problem is that the computer models, by themselves,
                    are essentially raw data, lacking contextual material, subject expert
                    commentary, and textual analysis that could make them engaging and effective
                    tools for teaching and learning. 

                
The recent explosion of interest in online worlds, mapping software, and
                    three-dimensional games is reinforcing both consumer interest in
                    three-dimensional worlds and the pressing need for software to interrogate
                    three-dimensional content created to rigorous academic standards. While there
                    are many different types of software and online opportunities for interacting
                    with three-dimensional computer models, nothing currently available addresses
                    the unique requirements of humanities scholars and students. What is needed
                    is a concerted effort to move these research projects successfully from the
                    research lab to mainstream scholarship and pedagogy across the disciplines. 
This presentation will discuss efforts at UCLA by Drs. Lisa M.
                        Snyder and Scott Friedman to leverage existing and new modeling work for
                        broad pedagogical use by creating a real-time software interface and content
                        repository to provide a mechanism for exploring highly detailed
                        three-dimensional models in educational settings.

                
The first phase of the project, currently underway, is the creation of
                    generalized and extensible run-time software that will allow real-time
                    exploration of highly detailed, three-dimensional computer models in both formal
                    and informal educational settings. 
This run-time
                        software will address the greatest challenge for building knowledge through
                        use of three-dimensional computer models by providing scholars and educators
                        the mechanism to explore, annotate, craft narratives, and build arguments
                        within the three-dimensional space
 – in essence, facilitating the
                    creation of virtual learning environments that can be broadly disseminated to
                    educators and learners across grade levels and humanities disciplines. This
                    software will also allow the raw computer models to be used as the basis for
                    constructivist learning activities, so that students can actively engage with
                    the content to build knowledge by creating a personalized virtual learning
                    environment. 

                
This effort will provide an innovative way for scholars, students, and the
                    general public alike to interrogate academically generated three-dimensional
                    content. Scholars will be able to expand their own knowledge through interactive
                    exploration of the modeled environment, and, using the proposed authoring tools,
                    develop their own arguments and class presentations within the virtual space. By
                    capitalizing on student interest in three-dimensional content as evidenced by
                    the popularity of online worlds and mapping programs, this new software
                    will expose students to academically vetted content, encourage them to develop
                    critical thinking skills about the historic reconstruction process, and provide
                    an alternative to the traditional classroom methods for examining the built
                    environment. Lifelong learners will also be able to access the content and build
                    their own knowledge about past cultures. The availability of the proposed
                    software will also create opportunities to leverage existing modeling projects
                    by providing a mechanism for sharing content, and encourage new work that can
                    take advantage of the new run-time software.

                
The educational promise of digital computer environments has yet to be realized,
                    largely because past efforts have focused on the short-term constructivist
                    benefits of the process for the academic development team. As a result, a great
                    deal of content has been developed but is unavailable for general use. The
                    proposed repository and administrative front end that constitutes the second
                    phase of the project will facilitate submission of this scholar-created
                        content,
This type of content repository has precedent in the ‘Great
                        Buildings’ series created in the mid-1990s. It was also a central element of
                        Snyder’s doctoral dissertation, and the proposal of Koller et al. to archive
                        computer models of cultural heritage sites.
 allow the aggregation of
                    multi-media support material, and provide incentives for contributors to share
                    their data. In addition to providing them access to the open source software,
                    this administrative front end would ensure that content contributors are given
                    proper credit for their work, and provide them a mechanism to control how they
                    distribute their content and charge for their work.
This is an important
                        feature in that it would allow content providers the opportunity to generate
                        a revenue stream to support ongoing development and help to make large-scale
                        modeling projects self-sustaining.

            
Background
                
UCLA has a long history with three-dimensional computer modeling and on the
                    development of real-time software for exploration of virtual environments. Given
                    this long history, work on various fronts has been building to the development
                    of this run-time software and content repository since 1996. The idea for an
                    educational repository for real-time content was promoted in Snyder’s 2003
                    dissertation and was based on discussions with Dr. Scott Friedman (UCLA Academic
                    Technologies Services) in the preceding years. Work on computer reconstructions
                    of historic urban environments has been conducted through the Urban Simulation
                    Team at UCLA since 1996 and through the Experiential Technologies Center (the
                    successor lab to the CVRLab) since 1997.
Models constructed through the
                        UCLA Experiential Technologies Center include the NEH-funded model of
                        Karnak, John Dagenais’ reconstruction model of the Romanesque Cathedral of
                        Santiago de Compostela, Diane Favro’s work on ancient Rome, new student work
                        underway in Egypt under the direction of Willeke Wendrich (including models
                        of Fayuum and Saqqara). Work through the Urban Simulation Team includes the
                        Snyder’s model of the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893 and
                        reconstructions of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem in both the first and
                        eighth centuries.

            

            
The authors
                
Dr. Lisa M. Snyder has been a member of the Urban Simulation Team since 1996. She
                    is also the associate director for outreach and operations for the UCLA
                    Experiential Technologies Center which operates under UCLA’s Academic Technology
                    Services and the Institute for Digital Research and Education. Her research is
                    focused on the educational use of interactive computer environments. Through the
                    UST, she developed the real-time simulation models of the Herodian and Umayyad
                    Temple Mount site now installed at the Davidson Center in Jerusalem (see Figures
                    8-19) and is currently working on the computer reconstruction of the World’s
                    Columbian Exposition of 1893 (see Figures 1-7). 

                
 Dr. Scott Friedman is a computer scientist with UCLA’s Academic Technology
                    Services and, since 1994, has been the principal developer of the Urban
                    Simulation Team’s software systems. Friedman participated in the NSF funded
                    Virtual World Data Server project. His role in that project focused on
                    integrating an Urban Simulator client into that system to support multiple users
                    and very large data sets. He specializes in multimedia systems, interfaces for
                    three-dimensional environments, and distributed computing. His 2003 dissertation
                    focused on “The Pixelcluster: Real-time visualization using a cluster of
                    commodity workstations.”

            


            
Funding
                
This work is being supported by UCLA’s Academic Technology Services/Institute for
                    Digital Research and Education and the National Endowment for the
                    Humanities.

            
Figures 1-5. Screen snapshots taken from the real-time visual 
                    simulation model of the Herodian Temple Mount developed jointly by the 
                    Urban Simulation Team at UCLA and the Israel Antiquities Authority. From 
                    top to bottom: the Temple Mount; the north/south Roman road and 
                    Robinson’s Arch; on the platform; in the Royal Stoa; a view of the 
                    Second Temple from within the Royal Stoa.
                
                    

            
        
        

                
The Experiential Technologies Center
2005-2010
The Experiential Technologies Center, University of
                            California, Los Angeles
12 March 2010
Friedman, S.
2004
The Pixelcluster: Real-time visualization using a cluster
                            of commodity workstations
 Dissertation University of California,
                        Los Angeles.
Koller, D.
Frischer, B.
Humphreys, G.
2009
Research challenges for digital archives of 3D cultural
                            heritage models
Journal of Computing and Cultural Heritage
2(3): article 7
12 March
                            2010: via ACM Portal, UCLA
Snyder, L.
2003
The design and use of experiential instructional technology
                            for the teaching of architectural history in American undergraduate
                            architecture programs
University of California,
                        Los Angeles
Dissertation
The Urban Simulation Team at UCLA
1997-2010
The Urban Simulation Team, University of California, Los
                            Angeles
12 March 2010

        