The poster will argue that a retrospective museum-like exhibition of digital
                    media leads to further developments in the field of ‘visualisation’: the study
                    of the past offers new opportunities to emerging technologies. The poster is
                    based on an exhibition entitled ‘Is the virtual real?’ which took place at the
                    University of Paris-Sorbonne in October 2009, organized by the Research Centre
                    CATI (Cultures Anglophones et Technologies de l’ Information 
), and on the work in progress
                    of the digital preservation of the exhibition.

                
It will be supported by computer demonstrations showing 1) the time-perspective
                    issues in a retrospect on the history of Virtual Reality: examples of the
                    variety of the original documents 2) the interaction between different areas of
                    expertise in IT related to visualisation, and between history and IT practice,
                    during the exhibition 3) the preservation of the exhibition on digital records
                    as a source of new projects.

            

                A museum display on the history of virtual reality: from simulation to
                    image
                

                

                    From the past to the present: bringing precursors together
                    
A retrospect in a museum of science will have to show that present-day IT
                        applications are a convergence of many technologies of the past, eventually
                        leading to simulation.

                    
The first micro of the 1970s, the Micral N (1973) was made for a laboratory
                        in agronomy studying evaporation phenomena. Still earlier, an analogue
                        machine dating back to the 1960s, the EAI 580 (1963), before the digital
                        age, was used to calculate possible options and variations for industrial
                        processes such as crane counterweights and plane landing without visibility;
                        it was later used in research laboratories. The idea of ‘simulation’ existed
                        long before it converged with digital technology, which in early days lacked
                        the necessary computing power, and took over only when its computing speed
                        made it appropriate for simulation. Image or simulation technologies were
                        first distinct from computing, and a retrospect has to show the separate
                        strands.

                

                

                    From the future to the past: VR and interactivity
                    
The present computing power gives a new approach to history, by allowing us
                        to ‘experiment’ with the past. A hypothesis on the construction of the
                        Egyptian pyramid can be tested with a CAD programme by an architect – a
                        version of a present-day approach to industrial history where the expertise
                        of professionals is required to assess the plausibility of hypotheses
                        concerning industrial processes of the past. 

                    
VR programmes meant to reconstruct the architecture of past centuries –
                        Italian Renaissance buildings or the Georgian city of Bath – use the same
                        CAD tools as those employed nowadays in architects’ practices to plan for
                        future buildings. A case in point is the Renaissance theatre which was
                        published as a woodcut in a 16th century book, then, thanks to present-day
                        architectural software, became a 3D virtual model, which in turn served as a
                        plan to build a real wooden model; passing from 2D to 3D enables the viewer
                        to visualize the gradual distortion of the stage set as the spectators sit
                        farther from the seat of honour.

                    
The experimental approach also concerns the public, who can navigate
                        interactively. Examples of games exemplify the exchange between
                        entertainment and professional simulation, such as flight simulators which
                        may be used for both; and game engines may be used for architectural or
                        historical simulations. 

                

                

                    Visualisation between image and IT
                    

                        
3D technology, interpretation and practice

                            
 Technical practice gives a better understanding of an art. The
                            visitors in the exhibition could experiment the creation of 3D graphics
                            themselves on a computer at their disposal: practice on present-day
                            software enables the visitors to visualize the interaction between
                            geometry, technology and aesthetics that have made the history of VR –
                            and of architecture. They experience a new view of art history, starting
                            from cylinders and half-spheres to produce an image of Classical
                            rotundas with circular colonnades and domes.

                        
Various modes of presentation contextualize this combination of VR
                            programmes running on machines, both professional finished projects and
                            visitors’ experiments: they need to be supported by explanatory panels
                            on the history and practice of CAD and VR, placing it in a historical
                            context – 3D modelling dating back to Renaissance perspective. The
                            panels also have to explain the main notions of 3D graphics: the
                            creation of primitive forms associating geometry and art, the use of
                            textures, lighting and perspective through the ‘camera eye’, and
                            eventually animation. They show how the basic techniques of geometrical
                            coordinates experimented by the visitors underlie, after much
                            elaboration, the artistic finished products of VR that they can admire
                            in the exhibition.

                        
Virtual worlds such as Second Life, where the computing power and network
                            capabilities required can be used for artistic purposes such as a live
                            jazz performance broadcast internationally, also exemplify the
                            interactive possibilities of VR.

                    

                    

                        
Digital image aesthetics and the historical perspective
Films on the history of VR are shown, and here again media technology has
                            to be harnessed so as to suggest the historical perspective, based on
                            the practices of digital visualisation aesthetics; this involves
                            cooperation between historians of IT and digital media technicians.
                            Documentaries dating back to the early 1990 differ in pixel definition
                            from cutting-edge trailers of new programmes, yet they have to appear on
                            the same screen; videos on VR in medicine and videos on architecture are
                            focused differently. The resulting films have to show both the
                            similarity in techniques and the differences in purpose between
                            documentaries in these various areas. A solution is to present the early
                            films in a smaller format which makes pixelisation less visible, and
                            surround them with a frame to recover the format of the larger films;
                            the frame effect will in addition give them an old-fashioned air which
                            will suggest the time perspective.

                    

                    

                        
The museology of IT
The layout of the exhibition is meant to relate the various IT programmes
                            presented. An option was to take advantage of the exhibition space – in
                            our case, a linear two-nave 15th century building, in which a circuit
                            was organized so as to trace the history of VR from its beginning to
                            present-day supercomputers. The lighting is also of great importance,
                            implying cooperation between the electricians specialised in museology
                            and the historians of IT who are responsible for the exhibits, who need
                            to learn to understand one another’s requirements so that the exhibition
                            space is equipped and lit in order to throw into relief working
                            machinery (not static objects as in other exhibitions). 

                    

                    

                        
Preservation for the future: augmented reality
An exhibition on simulation takes advantage of IT technologies, and in
                            return it gives new options for developing these technologies. 

                        

                            
VR about VR
Records of the exhibition will be preserved as ‘augmented reality’, a
                                project which will maintain a permanent record of the exhibition.
                                The architectural setting of the exhibition is suited to VR, so that
                                the result will be the history of VR within a VR model. A narrative
                                structure will have to be combined with a virtual spatial
                                environment. The project is thus a contribution to theories on the
                                structure of digital information.

                        

                        

                            
Records for preservation
While the exhibition was on, records were made: photos, films of the
                                lectures, which will be integrated with the documents shown,
                                originally in several formats. The recording of the exhibition in
                                progress for future VR use was part of the sessions themselves.

                            
Visualisation thus combines aesthetic and technical issues at several
                                levels. The poster with give images for each point; the several
                                types of computer programmes presented with it will allow the
                                conference delegates to experiment on demos of work in progress as
                                well as see views of the exhibits at different scales.

                        

                    

                

            

        
        

                
Bonnett, J.
2004
New Technologies, New Formalisms for Historians: The 3D
                            Virtual Buildings Project
Literary and Linguistic Computing
19(3)
273-287
Brito, A.
2008
Blender 3D: Architecture, Buildings
                            and Scenery – Create Photorealistic Visualizations of Buildings,
                            Interiors and Environmental Scenery
Birmingham
Packt Publishing
Centre for Advanced Studies in Architecture, The University of
                            Bath.
2010
Completed Projects, Current Research
20 March 2010
Gallet-Blanchard, Liliane.
2009
From Virtual Reality to Augmented Reality and ‘Augmented
                            Virtuality’
Le Virtuel, une Réalité? Is the Virtual Real?
20 March 2010
Houdin, J-P.
Tran, F.
2009
Khéops Révélé
Paris
Gédéon – Dassault-Systèmes
DVD
Supercomputer Challenges
June 2007
408
special issue
Tavernor, R.
Day, A.
2000
The Computer and Urban Modelling: Experiences Through
                            Time
Gallet-Blanchard, L.
Martinet, M-M.
Villes en Visite Virtuelle
Paris
Presses de l’Université Paris-Sorbonne
21-20
Terras, M.
2000
Virtual Reality and Archaelogical Reconstruction
.
                            
Digital Environments: Design, Heritage and
                            Architecture, CHart Conference Proceedings, vol.2.
20 March 2010
King’s Visualisation Lab.
2010
Projects
20 March 2010

        