Computing in the Humanities, an undergraduate course at New York University,
                    represents a unique collaboration between the Computer Science Department and
                    the University Archives. The final assignment required students to select,
                    digitize, and contextualize materials from the Archives’ collections in an
                    interactive website. The design and implementation of the course incorporates
                    four current and important trends in both disciplines. First, the professor and
                    archivist worked closely together before and during the course, integrating the
                    archival research component into the core mission of the course. Second, the
                    students’ projects provided both increased subject access and dynamic Web
                    content to the repository and meaningful work to the students. Third, this
                    course produced students who “bridge” the needs of humanists with the
                    capabilities of technology. Fourth, this course illustrated the growing
                    importance of web programming in undergraduate computer science education.

                

                     Trend 1: Archives and archivists in the undergraduate classroom 
                    
Archiving journals and conference presentations have increasingly focused on
                        the experiences of archivists at educational institutions who seek to
                        integrate archival resources into the undergraduate curriculum. Notably
                        absent from this literature, however, is any mention of collaboration
                        between archivists and professors in computer science or related
                        departments.

                    
Before the course began, the professor, undergraduate librarian, and
                        University archivists discussed the structure of the course. The librarian
                        and assistant University archivist co-lectured for one class session. The
                        students who elected to work in the University Archives for their final
                        projects were also required to meet with the assistant archivist before
                        embarking on their research. These meetings ensured that students would have
                        sufficient resources at the Archives to conduct their primary (visual) and
                        secondary (textual) research. Students from the class were also required to
                        digitize photographs, documents, and audio materials as part of the
                        assignment.

                    
At the end of the semester many students who had used the University Archives
                        for their project turned in their assignments for publication on the
                        University Archives website. In doing so, the difference between a class
                        project and a project published on the Internet under the authority of the
                        University Archives became clear.

                

                

                     Trend 2: Projects increase access to archival materials and provide
                        meaningful work for students 
                    
 The projects produced by students in this course reflected the students’
                        interests in the University Archives’ collections—interests that do not
                        necessarily coincide with the digitization and processing priorities of
                        Archives staff. Archives staff can use this information to determine what
                        researchers might look for in our collections and use this information to
                        influence future digitization and processing priorities. Additionally, by
                        digitizing materials from across collections centered on a particular theme,
                        the students actually increased access for other users.

                    
By allowing students to curate their own mini-collections, the repository
                        opened up new opportunities to interpret these materials. This
                        interpretation represents an instance of what Tom Nesmith describes as the
                        “new description…a much more thorough contextual mapping of pathways through
                        the masses of records [that] add[s] evidential value to the records”
                        (Nesmith, 2007). By juxtaposing student projects with finding aids
                        prepared by the Archives, a viewer of the University Archives website can
                        compare the students’ interpretations and the context of the records that
                        were digitized. This contextualization is essential to understand these
                        projects and the records they feature rather than provide additional
                        “background noise of the World Wide Web” (Eamon, 2006). Future
                        collaborations might include students working with the Archives-generated
                        XML itself to discover new methods of embedding information, or modifying
                        the schema or stylesheets to include different information.

                

                

                     Trend 3: Nexus between computer science and archives
                    
The course introduced new users to the repository and creates new areas of
                        collaboration between archivists and faculty. Students enrolled in the
                        course learned rudimentary archival research skills and, most importantly,
                        were introduced to the same issues archivists wrestle with on a daily basis
                        when providing materials to users.

                    
Many articles written in the past decade mention how online digital
                        collections and delivery of finding aids online have become rote rather than
                        exceptional for most repositories. Yet at the same time there have been few
                        overtures by archivists to bridge this digital divide at the undergraduate
                        or even at the graduate level. In her 2005 survey of archival job postings,
                        Michelle Riggs found that employers increasingly require knowledge of EAD
                        and the markup languages HTML, XML, and SGML. She urges archival education
                        programs and library science programs to offer instruction that matches
                        employer demand (Riggs, 2005).

                    
By introducing students with programming skills to research in an archive,
                        this course also sought to create students who understand and can combine
                        the capabilities of technology with the needs of a researcher. Corinne
                        Jörgensen laments that the professionals who create access systems for
                        digital resources, and those who access those resources, do not speak to
                        each other or reference each other’s research (Jörgensen,
                            1999).

                



                

                    Trend 4: Emerging importance of web programming in undergraduate computer
                        science education
                    
The Computer Science Department undergraduate program at New York University
                        offers both a Computer Science major and minor as well as a minor in Web
                        Programming and Applications. The department encourages faculty to create
                        courses in web programming to meet the needs of students in both the CS
                        major and minor programs.

                    
Web programming has been increasing in importance in university Computer
                        Science Education. “Despite its reputation in some circles, web programming
                        is conceptually deep; it gives a simple way to learn event-driven
                        programming, to become conversant in many languages, learn the client-server
                        paradigm, interact with databases, and more” (Stepp, 2009). Students with only one semester of
                        studies in implementing websites and one semester of a high-level
                        programming language such as Java or Python can build complex and
                        interactive websites. We can thus reach students across a variety of
                        disciplines, as this project offers a rich opportunity for
                        inter-disciplinary studies. Both early CS majors and CS minors have an
                        opportunity to focus on the content of the sites as well as the technology
                        and programming required to build them.

                    
 Programming and technology requirements for this project included:
                            
XML and XSLT (using text editors without a WYSIWYG interface)
                                for the collection catalogues
PHP and JavaScript as well as advanced XHTML and CSS for the
                                user interface
Original podcasts and work with appropriate multi-media objects
                                related to the collections

                    
At the University of Houston, Clear Lake, faculty used the following goals to
                        design programming assignments for web programming coursework (Yue,
                            2004):
                        
Realistic: the assignments should be similar to useful real-world
                                projects.
Complete and ready: the products of the assignments should be Web
                                applications that can be deployed with no or little
                                modification.
Technically important: the assignments should use important
                                concepts and technologies.
Illustrative and interesting: the assignments should be
                                intellectually appealing and interesting.

                    
We believe that the project that we developed together for this course meets
                        these criteria with the added benefit of the intellectual and research
                        challenge posed to the students using primary source materials as the
                        foundation of their work. This allowed us to expand on the criteria as
                        follows for our projects: 
The assignments should provide a basis for substantive historical
                                research.
The assignments should provide a basis for inter-disciplinary
                                discussion and research for dual-major students and students with
                                majors outside of computer science.
The assignments should provide real world experience with skill
                                sets that students in the Humanities fields would use in future
                                research and graduate studies.
The assignment should provide the student with an opportunity to
                                experience the complete life-cycle of a programming project: from
                                inception, research and design through implementation and
                                publication.

                    
In conclusion, we believe that the current trends in archival research and
                        computer science undergraduate education have converged in a way that
                        provides rich opportunities for our students as well as for the university.
                        Students were engaged in and enthusiastic about their projects, which
                        represented real-world applications of the concepts that comprised the
                        course’s goals. Several students cited the course as their inspiration to
                        attend graduate school in library and information science. We believe that
                        the need for graduates with this combined set of skills will continue to
                        grow.

                

        
        

                
Eamon, Michael
2006
A ‘Genuine Relationship with the Actual’: New Perspectives
                            on Primary Sources, History, and the Internet in the
                            Classroom
The History Teacher
39, 3
1-32
Jörgensen, Corinne
1999
Access to Pictorial Material: A Review of Current Research and Future
                            Prospects
Computers and the Humanities
33
293-318
Nesmith, Tom
2007
What is an archival education?
Journal of the Society of Archivists
28, 1
1-17
Riggs, Michelle
2005
The
                            Correlation of Archival Education and Job Requirements Since the Advent
                            Encoded Archival Description
Journal of
                            Archival Organization
3, 1
61-79
Stepp, Marty, et al.
2009
A
                            ‘CS 1.5’ Introduction to Web Programming
 Proceedings of SIGSCE
121-125
Yue, Kwok-Bun
Wei
                            Ding
2004
Design and Evolution of
                            an Undergraduate Course on Web Application Development
Proceedings of ITICSE
22-26

        