In recent years, people have tended to be overwhelmed by a vast amount of information
                in various contexts. Therefore, arguments about "Information Visualization" as a
                method to make information easy to comprehend are more than understandable.

            
This paper will argue the method of visualization of vast amount of information using
                3-D viewer, and we will introduce an environment called KACHINA CUBE (KC) that can
                visualize various information using a “cube”. We have introduced KC in DH2009
                (Saito, Inaba and Ohno, 2009). Then, we limited the use of KC to geographic
                information. But now, KC can adopt not only geographic information but also various
                events. In this paper, we introduce KC’s new design and function.

            

                Design Concept of KC
                

                    Visualization Design
                    
The most important thing in this research is to develop a Web system to
                        integrate a large quantity of fragmentary information and to construct a
                        method for visualizing a "scheme of things". For this purpose, we need to
                        place all fragmentary information in the same context. Moreover, we have to
                        come up with a way to put various information in a cube.

                    
We decided to design KC in three dimensions, two dimensions for geographical
                        information and another one for temporal information (see Fig. 1). In this
                        virtual 3D space (CUBE model), users can post formal and informal story
                        fragments and can spin the cube (see Fig. 2). Among them, we call formal
                        ones history fragments, and informal fragments story ones. KC also supports
                        researchers to make linkages among fragments in periodical or logical order.
                        We call a set of cultural fragments a storyline.

                    
We are developing KC’s search-engine for the most appropriate word. A
                        fragment highlighted means that it includes the search term. Moreover, if
                        there is more than one appropriate fragment, a line is drawn among those
                        fragments. This function helps to find a hidden context or story among
                        fragmented information. When words are searched and some words have a
                        logical conjunction, multiple lines are drawn, as well as color-coded, based
                        on the number of matched words. This search function thus makes visible the
                        degree of connection among fragments.

                    

                        
Fig 1. Application of CUBE Model for geographic information
                            

                    

                        
Fig 2. Rotation of cube
                            

                

                

                    Sharing Design
                    
W3C puts tremendous efforts to create standardized frameworks for Web, and
                        researchers in digital humanities regard semantic web technology as one of
                        the key research fields. This kind of technology gives us various chances to
                        share data for other use. We believe archived cultural data should be
                        standardized to fit in this framework, which allows users to access data and
                        utilize them in various platforms.

                    
We apply RDF/OWL to define our data. Its extensive and flexible definition is
                        suitable for our system and motivates other researchers to access our data
                        (Bray, 2001).

                    

                        
History fragment class: Objective information in textbook or
                                dictionary
Story fragment class: Subjective information such as oral
                                history
Storyline class: Aggregate of historical and story fragments based
                                on a specific context
Geography class: Geographical information of the historical and
                                story fragments
Temporal class: Time when the incidents told in historical and
                                story fragments occurred

                

                

                    Conceptual map Design
                    
KC can adopt not only geographic information but also various events. In
                        order to handle non-geographical information, KC supports conceptual maps.
                        Moreover, the way in which a conceptual map is made should be considered. A
                        conceptual map is a figure which expresses a development of story or event.
                        We decided to apply the Trajectory Equifinality Model (TEM) to the process
                        of making conceptual map. TEM is a theory to capture a certain phenomenon
                        from view point of “time” and “process” (Valsinar and Sato 2006).

                    
Moreover, KC is a web-based application that is built on the client-server
                        architecture. In this system, client side application is implemented using
                        ActionScript. On the other hand, server side application is developed by
                        using PHP (PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor). KC adopts MySQL as a relational
                        database management system.

                

                

                    

                        
Fig 3. Conceptual map of a muder case
                            
 Below is an example of making a conceptual map using TEM. Fig.3 is
                        a conceptual map to visualize a process of investigation and trial of a
                        certain actual murder case. This conceptual map expresses both the process
                        of the murder case itself and its trial. The map’s 12 columns represent
                        development of this murder case; and 3 rows, the statements in the court of
                        the defendant and prosecution. The defendant's statements are set on the
                        top, while that of prosecution on the bottom. Moreover, statements that are
                        pertinent to neither the top nor the bottom are set in the middle. 

                    
Fig.4 shows a result of this visualization with KC. This system is suitable
                        to grasp the perspective on complicated cases which include multiple
                        statements, stories, or contexts.

                    

                        
Fig 4. Visualization of the possess of trail
                            

                    
All that has to be done is to prepare conceptual maps, after which this
                        method can be applicable to numerous cases in the humanities fields. For
                        instance, by using this method, we are trying to visualize argumentation
                        about certain literary efforts.

                    
Moreover, using visualization of search results function, we tried to find
                        fragments which include "
拳銃
 (gun)",
                            "
お金
 (money)", "
警察
 (police)". As a
                        result, three lines colored here in red, blue, and green appear (see
                        Fig.5).

                    
The red line means fragments which include "gun"; the blue, fragments with
                        both "gun" and "money"; and the green, fragments which include all of "gun",
                        "money" and "police". That is, the green line which includes all of the
                        three shows the strongest tie.

                    
Using this function allows not only us to extract fragments based on the
                        given words, but also to detect some connections among information as well
                        as their strength. Because of this function, it is possible to conduct
                        text-mining through visual interface.

                

                

                    Conclusions and prospects
                    
Fig 5. Visualization of search results
                        
As a result, our system demonstrates a lot of potential for research in
                        various fields, which we have to prove by developing further this software
                        with applications, as well as examining it in more humanities case studies.
                        Our KC is significantly different from these previous Web systems in the
                        following three points: 
Adoption of CUBE model (a 3D-viewer that combines the map with the
                                timeline);
Implementation of a user interface suitable to contain a vast
                                amount of information;
Implementation of analysis components for narratives and oral
                                histories

                    
We are trying to implement some new functions now, among which the most
                        drastic is the "nesting cube" structure. All fragments in the KACHINA CUBE
                        are defined as independent cubes in this structure. Furthermore, we can make
                        a recursively-defined cube severalfold by using this function. Because of
                        this, a large amount of information can be organized hierarchically.

                    
For example, "England" could be set as a cube on the highest layer (root
                        layer). Moreover, a cube of "Liverpool" can be set in "England". In
                        "Liverpool", a cube of "The Beatles" might be attached. Therefore, it may
                        include a cube of "John Lennon". Each cube can include any piece of
                        information of the same level as a cube. This architectonics can change ways
                        of organizing and browsing information fundamentally and support visualizing
                        of a "scheme of things" very well. At the same time, we hope this
                        architectonics will contribute greatly to Digital Humanities.

                    
Fig 6. Nesting cube structure
                        

            

        
        

                
Saito, S.
Ohno, S.
Inaba, M.
2009
Collective Culture and Visualization of Spatiotemporal
                            Information
Proceedings of Digital Humanities
                            2009
University of Maryland, USA
22-25 June 2009
248-250
Bray, T.
2001
What is RDF?
14 November, 2008
Valsiner, J.
Sato, T.
2006
Historically Structured Sampling (HSS): How can
                            psychology’s methodology become tuned in to the reality of the
                            historical nature of cultural psychology?
Pursuit of meaning. Advances in cultural and cross-cultural
                            psychology
Straub, J.
et al.
Transcript Verlag
Bielefeld
215-251

        