
                    
Wargaming is an applied tradition of interactive modeling and simulation
                        dating back to the early 19th century or, if one counts more abstract
                        martial pastimes like Chess and Go, all the way to antiquity. Why a panel
                        about games (tabletop as well as computer) that spotlight war—surely the
                        most inhumane of organized human endeavor—at a digital humanities
                        conference?

                    
First, we assume that wargaming as both a descriptive or predictive tool as
                        well as a recreational pastime transcends specific technologies of
                        implementation. For example, when a tabletop wargamer moves troops across
                        the battlefield to attack an enemy, they are enacting a specific procedure
                        that is defined against a larger complex of procedures and systems which
                        collectively aspire to represent historical reality within a range of
                        probable (or possible) outcomes. The abstraction of combat, movement,
                        supply, morale, and other basic military considerations into algorithmic
                        process or a numerically expressed spectrum of outcomes—randomized by die
                        rolls within the parameters of a situation—makes the genre a rich source for
                        anyone interested in the formal and procedural representation of dynamic,
                        often ambiguous, literally contested experience. 

                    
Second, we are concerned finally not with wargames for their own sake, but as
                        exemplars of simulation as a mode of knowledge representation. As a genre,
                        wargames offer some of the most complex and nuanced simulations in any
                        medium. A typical tabletop game might have many dozens of pages of rules,
                        defining procedures and interactions for hundreds or even thousands of
                        discrete components (unit tokens) across as much as twenty square feet of
                        map space. This places them at the formal and physical extremes of ludic
                        complexity. Almost from the outset of the personal computer revolution,
                        meanwhile, wargames (as distinct from games with superficial militaristic
                        themes) became a major software genre. Popular tabletop wargames were
                        rapidly translated to the screen by companies such as SSI, with crude
                        artificial intelligence crafting opposing moves. Other games dispensed with
                        the conventions of their manual predecessors and (much like flight
                        simulators) sought to recreate an intense real-time first-person experience.
                        Harpoon (1989) placed a generation of early armchair enthusiasts in the
                        Combat Information Center of a modern naval frigate, with countless
                        variables in weapon and detection systems to master.

                    
 We believe that the digital humanities, which have already embraced certain
                        traditions of modeling, might have something to learn from an exploration of
                        this particular genre of simulation, which has proved influential in both
                        professional military and political settings as well as the realm of popular
                        hobby and recreation. (We also find it suggestive that several long-time
                        members of the digital humanities community were “teenage grognards,”
                        suggesting that the games were of a piece with other elements of a
                        particular generational path to computing.)

                

            
        
Kriegsspiel of course is German for (literally) “war game.” In 1824, the Prussian
                    staff officer Georg von Reisswitz formally introduced the game (versions of
                    which had been kicking around in his family for years) to his fellow officers.
                    “This is not a game! This is training for war!” one general is said to have
                    exclaimed (Perla 26). It was quickly adopted, and became the foundation for the
                    German institutionalization of wargaming which persisted through World War II.
                    The von Reisswitz Kriegsspiel was played by laying wooden or metal blocks across
                    maps to mark troop dispositions (Figure 1). Games were conducted on actual
                    topographical maps, often terrain anticipated as the site of future operations
                    (for example, the 1914 Schlieffen plan was subject to extensive rehearsal as a
                    Kriegsspiel). By the middle of the 19th century the “game” had evolved two major
                    variants, so-called “rigid” and “free” Kriegsspiel. The latter attempted to
                    replace the elaborate rules and calculations with a human umpire making
                    decisions about combat, intelligence, and other outcomes on the battlefield.

                
In this paper, we take the twin traditions of rigid and free Kriegsspiel as our
                    point of departure for thinking about simulation gaming in terms of what Howard
                    Rheingold, in the context of computing, once called “tools for thought.” Indeed,
                    the fork in Kriegsspiel’s development history anticipates much about both manual
                    and computer simulation design. Dungeons and Dragons, the progenitor of all
                    tabletop role-playing systems, grew from a set of medieval wargaming rules
                    called Chainmail. The original developers (Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson) added
                    the magic and monsters, but they also replaced much of the game’s rules
                    apparatus with an umpire dubbed “dungeon master” whose job it was to adjudicate
                    the outcomes of various actions, sometimes with the help of tables and dice, but
                    just as often “freestyle,” relying on judgment and instinct. Wargaming itself
                    has largely remained divided along the same fault between rigid and free
                    systems, with the former attracting hobbyists who buy pre-packaged games
                    (several thousand have been published) to try their hand at Gettysburg or
                    Waterloo and the latter the domain of professional consultants who stage
                    elaborate role playing exercises of the sort originally conducted at thinktanks
                    like RAND but are today as likely to assist a board in planning a corporate
                    merger as a military staff in planning a mission.

                
As the above suggests, wargames are also both predictive and retrospective in
                    orientation. On the one hand, hobbyist games are often marketed promising
                    insight into the past, tempting a player into believing that with sufficient
                    study and canniness he or she might out-general Napoleon and rewrite history
                    (Dunnigan). In this sense, wargames align with certain strains of academic
                    counter-factual history (Ferguson, et al.). Yet Kriegsspiel was attractive to
                    professional planners precisely because of its predictive value: an accurate
                    formal model of some battlefield dilemma would presumably allow commanders to
                    rehearse their tactics and continually alter the parameters of the situation to
                    arrive at solutions to the military problem. Often, in fact these dual
                    orientations were pursued in tandem, with a historical outcome from a game
                    serving as the control case for subsequent prediction: if a game can restage
                    Midway according to the trajectory of actual events, then in principle outcomes
                    from its hypothetical situations might be equally trusted.

                
There is yet another way of thinking about wargames though, one that does not
                    assume naïve faith in their capacity as either predictors or descriptors of
                    real-world phenomena. One great virtue of tabletop games is that, by their
                    nature, their rules systems are absolutely transparent. Everything the players
                    need to play the game must be in the box, and the quantitative model
                    underpinning the game system is thereby materially exposed for inspection and
                    analysis. Many gamers collect and compare dozens of different games on the same
                    subject to see how different designers have chosen to model and interpret
                    events. The hobby is filled with vigorous discussions about designers’ intents,
                    as well as house rules and variants, because part of what comes packaged with
                    the game is the game system. (Indeed, the term “game designer” originated at
                    SPI, one of the hobby’s premier wargame publishers.) As one wargame enthusiast
                    shrewdly observes, “What wins a wargame is but a dim reflection of what wins a
                    battle, or a war. Sometimes, what wins a wargame doesn’t reflect reality at all”
                    (Thompson). In this view, the game engine is a procedural instrument for
                    producing an outcome whose value lies in its potential for provoking
                    counter-factual analysis. A wargame--either manual or computer--may permit
                    Napoleon to win at Waterloo: the salient question is not whether the game was
                    “right” but in the questions it exposes about whether Napoleon really could have
                    done so (and if so, how). This viewpoint actually comports with that of
                    professional wargame facilitators, who assert that the ultimate value of their
                    games is 
not 
predictive in any simple sense, but rather
                    as “part of a process persuading people that there are other ways to think about
                    problems” (Herman 59). A modern boardroom wargame, in other words, provides a
                    safe space in which participants can explore solutions that would not have been
                    ventured in a more conventional setting.

                
After establishing this background through examples, the paper will propose a new
                    Kriegsspiel implementation that modulates between rigid and free design
                    parameters in order to expose—deliberately—the workings of the game engine as a
                    tool for the kind of thinking Thompson suggests. The key counter-factual
                    analysis is access to the game’s internal systems, and analysis of their
                    function as systems for procedural representation, what Kirschenbaum has
                    elsewhere called 
procedural granularity
. Our Kriegsspiel
                    model will thus permit play of the game in its various historical incarnations,
                    while simultaneously exposing and even directing user attention to various game
                    systems. At the same time, our model draws inspiration from von Reisswitz’s
                    attempt to simulate the “fog of war.” This term, which was coined by that most
                    influential of all modern military theorists, Carl von Clauswitz, aptly
                    describes the gaps in situational awareness experienced by soldiers and
                    commanders on the battlefield. We note, however, that it also corresponds to the
                    more modern game theoretic notion of “imperfect information” and to the general
                    idea that successful simulation—both as analytical exercise and as imaginative
                    activity—depends largely on what is not “filled in” by the game environment. We
                    believe, indeed, that by building these kinds of environments, we can come to a
                    better understanding of how this important dynamic works in interactive
                    environments more generally. The kind of Kriegsspiel we propose is finally a
                    tool not for thinking about war, but for thinking about representation and
                    design.

                

                    
Figure 1. A game of Kriegsspiel played using a modern set
                    
                
            
            

                    
Clauswitz, Carl von
 On War
Oxford
Oxford University Press
2008
Dunnigan, James F.
The Complete Wargames Handbook
New York
Quill
1992
Ferguson, Niall
Virtual History: Alternatives and
                                Counterfactuals
New York
 Basic
                                Books
1999
Herman, Mark
Frost, Mark
Kurz, Robert
Wargaming for
                                Leaders
New York
McGraw
                                Hill
2009
Kirschenbaum, Matthew G.
“War Stories: Board Wargames and (Vast) Procedural
                                Narratives”
Third Person
Harrigan,
                                Pat
Wardrip-Fruin
                                Noah
Cambridge
MIT Press
2009
357-71
Leeson, Bill (trans.)
The von Reisswitz Kriegsspiel
 Too
                                Fat Lardies
2007
Perla, Peter
The Art of
                                Wargaming
Annapolis
Naval Institute Press
1990
Thompson, Nels
Learning from Wargames
Battles
2 
2009
60

            
Simulation is a key method for analyzing situations and events as well as for
                    presenting them to the public. Although this panel focuses on the simulation of
                    military events (Arnhem), the same principles apply to computer-based
                    simulations as well as personal “role-playing” games, and to simulations of
                    other types, such as financial simulations (1830), medical simulations (ER; see
                    also Halloran et al, 2009), or political situations (Origins of World War
                    II).

                
In broad terms (Frasca 2001; Kirschenbaum 2003), a simulation is a narrative
                    generator, a system containing in potential a large number of possible sequences
                    of events. At the same time, to be practical, a simulation must quantize the
                    infinite variety of potential narrative reality to a small set of event
                    categories, a set small enough to be tractable and manipulable to the players. A
                    simple example of this is the playing field or map itself. In a typical tactical
                    simulation, the map will be “discretized” into a regular array of hexagonal
                    regions, typically assumed to uniform in composition (“forest hexes”), possibly
                    with edge effects such as rivers or walls. Another example is the with edge
                    effects such as rivers or walls. Another example is the playing piece itself,
                    which can range from a simple wooden counter (as in Risk or Diplomacy) to a
                    bewildering array of symbols representing high level abstract properties of a
                    multi-person combat unit (Arnhem), or even a detailed schematic of individual
                    functional capacities (Star Fleet Battles).

                
Similarly, the relationship of events to each other is controlled by game rules
                    describing the set of permissible actions and their (possibly probabilistic)
                    outcomes. For example, “ships” are not typically permitted to move through
                    “forest”; “cavalry” usually moves faster than “artillery,” and the effect of
                    “encountering” enemy artillery may result in the elimination of a counter, its
                    enforced movement (“retreat”), or other effects. 

                
 In this paper, we analyze the mathematical basis for these representations,
                    stripping them both of their narrative aspects (the association of any
                    particular hex with the Argonne forest, for example) as well as their
                    technological aspects (whether the region is represented by colored cardboard,
                    pixels, or an abstract name). We focus particularly on the differences between
                    quantifed and non-quantified representations as well as between probabilistic
                    and deterministic representations. We also discuss some of the aspects of the
                    unrepresented–and therefore illegal–aspects of reality. In some cases, these can
                    be seen as aspects of increasing realism by disallowing activities that could
                    not physically take place in our hypothetical universe, but can also be seen as
                    limiting the choices for a creative player, or even of enforcing some sort of
                    political correctness upon the game universe itself by outlawing possible but
                    distasteful alternatives. We suggest both that the narratives generated as well
                    as our analysis of simulated narratives can be enhanced by an understanding of
                    the abstract structure of the representations, and that this may eventually
                    enhance our ability to understand non-simulated narratives such as those
                    generated by counterfactual historians.

            
            

                    
Ferguson, Niall
Virtual History: Alternatives and
                                Counterfactuals
New York
 Basic
                                Books
1999
 Frasca, Gonzalo
"SIMULATION 101: Simulation versus
                                Representation"
2001
Halloran M.E.
Ferguson N.M.
Eubank S.
Longini
                                I.M.
Cummings D.A.
Lewis B.
Xu
                                S.
Fraser C.
Vullikanti A.
,
                                
Germann T.C.
Wagener
                                D.
Beckman R.
Kadau
                                K.
Barrett C.
Macken C.A.
Burke D.S.
Cooley P.
Modeling targeted layered containment of an influenza
                                pandemic in the United States
PNAS
10:1073
2008
PMID: 18332436
Kirschenbaum, Matthew
2003
I was a Teenage Grognard
Salen, Katie
Zimmerman, Eric
Rules of Play : Game Design Fundamentals
2004
Cambridge
MIT Press
1830
1983
Avalon Hill
Arnhem 
1972

                                Panzerfaust Publications
Diplomacy
1959
Avalon Hill
ER
2005
Vivendi Interactive
Origins of World War II
1971
Avalon Hill
Risk
1957
Parker Brothers
Star Fleet
                                Battles
1979
 Task Force
                                Games

            
Ever since the development of ‘Kriegspiel’ nearly two centuries ago, military
                    professionals and enthusiasts have used simulation and gaming techniques to
                    model real military conflicts.
See P.Perla, 
The Art of
                            Wargaming
, (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1990) and J.Dunnigan,
                            
The Complete Wargames Handbook
 (New York: William
                        Morrow, 2nd ed., 1992).
 This phenomenon builds on the theoretical
                    similarity between war and games, in that both are dialectical strategic
                    contests between opposing wills, each struggling to prevail.
See T.Cornell
                        & T.Allen (eds.), 
War and Games
, (Rochester NY:
                        Boydell, 2002), which includes a chapter by myself.
 Hence, Clausewitz
                    said that ‘In the whole range of human activities, war most closely resembles a
                    game of cards’.
C. von Clausewitz,
 On War
, edited
                        and translated by M.Howard & P.Paret, (Princeton: Princeton University
                        Press, 1976), p.86.

                
The growing potential of computers has naturally transformed the field of
                    conflict simulation. Military training now employs networked computer arrays
                    running real time first person models of entire conflict environments, and
                    millions of enthusiasts use similar first person simulations of air combat,
                    ground fighting and the like.
The similarity between the genres has become
                        so great that virtually the same games are often employed by military
                        professionals and civilian enthusiasts, as with the commercial game 
Armed Assault
 (Bohemia Interactive, 2007), whose
                        military variant 
VBS2
 is widely used as a training
                        aid and has now even been released back to the public by the UK Ministry of
                        Defence as a recruitment device! 
 However, what is interesting is the
                    persistence of traditional manual simulation techniques alongside this
                    computerised mainstream. Just as military forces continue to use real field
                    exercises, so many enthusiasts continue to employ pre-computer age techniques
                    such as maps and counters in their modelling of conflict. Indeed, such ‘manual’
                    wargames are now being published at a faster rate than ever before, and there
                    are still far more manual than computer simulations in existence, especially of
                    historical conflicts.
See the flood of new manual game announcements on
                            
, and compare this with the survey 30
                        years ago in N.Palmer, 
The Comprehensive Guide to Board
                            Wargaming
, (London: Arthur Barker, 1977) and with the new computer
                        game announcements on 
. 

                
I have been playing and designing conflict simulations for over three decades,
                    and I use both manual and computerised versions routinely as instructional aids
                    and research tools in the War Studies Department at KCL, including through an MA
                    course in which students design their own simulations of conflicts of their
                        choice.
See my course website at 
, and my book Lost Battles: Reconstructing the Great Clashes of the
                        Ancient World, (London: Hambledon Continuum, 2007).
 In this paper, I
                    will explore the benefits and limits of computerisation in conflict simulation,
                    and explain why my own forthcoming book Simulating War focuses so heavily on
                    manual simulation techniques despite the ongoing computer revolution.

                
The paper will have two central themes. One is the complex and double-edged
                    nature of ‘accessibility’ in the simulation field. Computer simulations tend to
                    be more accessible to users, but harder to programme and design, so they are
                    best suited to expert-led situations in which a few highly capable individuals
                    devote considerable effort to creating a model which can be learnt and used ‘as
                    is’ by masses of less qualified people. Manual simulations, by contrast, tend to
                    be less accessible to users because they need to master lengthy rules to be able
                    to operate the model at all, but in the process the users are required to engage
                    much more directly with the designer’s ideas and assumptions, and it is a short
                    step from being able to play a manual simulation to being able to tweak the
                    rules or even to design entirely new systems to give a better reflection of
                    one’s own understanding of the underlying military reality. Hence, manual
                    simulations are much more accessible from a design perspective, since one does
                    not need to be a computer programmer to create new systems, and since using
                    other people’s systems conveys a much better understanding of design
                    techniques.

                
Many recent computer simulations have sought to soften their expert-led character
                    by incorporating provision for simple modification and scenario generation by
                    users themselves.
See, for example, 
Armed Assault

                        (Bohemia Interactive, 2007), and Norm Koger, 
The
                            Operational Art of War III
, (Matrix Games, 2006).
 However,
                    this flexibility rarely extends to changing the fundamental systems, and it is
                    actually manual simulation design which has become radically more accessible and
                    democratised in the computer age, thanks to the ease with which individuals can
                    now design full colour maps and counters and sell or give away digitised copies
                    of their rules and graphics online without any physical production or
                    distribution costs.
See, for instance, 
 and 
. 
 Since I believe that
                    designing simulations for oneself is a far better way of gaining insight into
                    the dynamics of a real conflict than is simply playing someone else’s computer
                    game on that subject, I see the much greater design accessibility of manual
                    simulations as a major reason for their continued production and relevance, with
                    computer graphics and online distribution playing a key role, but without the
                    rules themselves having to be coded into computer software.

                
The second key theme of this paper will be that the relative advantages of manual
                    and computer simulation vary greatly depending on the type of conflict being
                    modelled and the perspective which users are intended to adopt. Broadly
                    speaking, the more fast-moving and physically calculable the conflict
                    environment, and the more that users are intended to experience the perspective
                    of a single real individual, the more that computers have to offer. Hence,
                    although it is possible to simulate aerial dogfights using maps, counters and
                    dozens of pages of highly complex and time-consuming rules, the fast-paced 3D
                    manoeuvres are obviously much better captured by real-time computer simulations
                    from the perspective of the individual cockpits, and this is exactly what I use
                    in my own teaching about air combat.
Compare, for example, J.D.Webster’s
                        manual game 
Achtung – Spitfire!
, (Phoenixville PA:
                        Clash of Arms, 1995), with the PC game 
Battle of Britain
                            II: Wings of Victory
, (G2 Games, 2005). 
 Even when
                    simulations are intended to model entire battles, computers can employ AI
                    routines to mimic the limited perspectives of an individual commander, by
                    masking the full picture in a way which manual simulations find harder because
                    their users must run the whole system rather than just playing individual roles
                    within it.
See, for instance, the PC games 
Take Command:
                            Second Manassas
, (Paradox Interactive, 2006), and 
Airborne Assault: Conquest of the Aegean
, (Panther Games,
                        2006).

                
The trouble with computers is that their unparalleled number-crunching abilities
                    tend to encourage the dangerous belief that accurate simulation is primarily a
                    matter of adding more and more parameters and increasingly detailed data. Manual
                    simulation designers, by contrast, must perforce focus on identifying and
                    modelling the really significant dynamics in that particular conflict, since
                    their games would otherwise be completely unplayable.
The classic example
                        of such an unplayable monster is Richard Berg’s 
Campaign
                            for North Africa
, (New York: Simulations Publications Incorporated,
                        1979).
 This pushes them more towards an output-based, top-down design
                    approach, whereas computer programmers tend to prefer more input-based,
                    bottom-up techniques. The differences can be striking. For instance, networked
                    first person computer simulations of infantry combat tend to produce grossly
                    ahistorical casualty rates despite highly precise and detailed modelling of
                    terrain and weaponry, because the individual participants behave far more boldly
                    than they would if the bullets were real. Manual simulations find it much easier
                    to model this suppressive effect of fire, by simply prohibiting users from
                    moving troops who are pinned down in this way.
This is well illustrated in
                        Phil Barker, 
War Games Rules, 1925-1950
, (Wargames
                        Research Group, 1988).
 Since it is very common indeed for conflicts
                    to be affected at least as much by such psychological dynamics as by more
                    calculable physical parameters, manual simulations can often identify and
                    capture the ‘big picture’ at least as effectively as do apparently more detailed
                    computer models.
See my book 
Lost Battles
, (London:
                        Hambledon Continuum, 2007), and the manual simulation which I co-authored
                        with my former MA student Garrett Mills on 
Roma Invicta?
                            Hannibal in Italy, 218-216 BC
, (Society of Ancients, 2008). I use
                        both of these in my teaching on ancient warfare, and I use similar manual
                        simulations in my classes on the operational and strategic aspects of modern
                        warfare. 

                
The central message of this paper will be that ‘simulation’ and even
                    ‘digitisation’ are not necessarily synonymous with ‘computerisation’, as so many
                    today seem to believe. Military professionals and enthusiasts have been
                    producing ‘digitised’ mathematical models of conflict since long before the
                    computer age, and such manual simulations continue to flourish alongside their
                    computerised counterparts. The biggest challenge they face is that computer
                    simulations now have much greater mass market appeal and a much more
                    professional image within defence and academia. However, without the broad
                    accessibility and top-down focus of manual simulation design, computerised
                    conflict simulation would become an unduly arcane and detail-obsessed science.
                    Manual and computer simulations of conflict will hence remain complementary
                    endeavours for many years to come.

            
        