This interactive digital poster demonstrates the advantages of digital publication
                over print for a particular kind of socio-historical project. It uses as an example
                three incomplete sets of sources: a travel journal, herbaria, and ephemera from an
                1862 tour of England and Europe that was undertaken by Wheaton College founder Eliza
                Baylies Wheaton, her husband Laban Morey Wheaton, and his cousin David Emory Holman.
                Linking TEI-compliant XML text with images of these sources, our poster/demo offers
                an approximation of the experiences that led to the collection of the items. Our
                interactive digital poster also includes links with historical maps of England,
                Wales, France, Italy, Switzerland, the Rhine Valley, and Belgium. Clicking on a
                location brings up relevant sections of the interpretive historical essay as well as
                images of relevant pages of the travel journal, herbaria, and ephemera. An
                interactive timeline offers an alternate method of accessing the data.

            
During the 1862 journey, Eliza Baylies Wheaton kept receipts for her housekeeping
                transactions in London, and she compiled a travel journal and herbaria, thus leaving
                for the historian multiple genres of accounts of her interests and experiences —
                financial, descriptive, and botanical. The resulting narratives convey the texture
                of daily life for a nineteenth-century traveler and reflect the wide-ranging
                interests of a woman who cherished her husband and friends, loved art and gardens,
                practiced devout Christianity, painstakingly recorded the engineering details of the
                new tunnel under the Thames that connected London to Greenwich, and pursued every
                opportunity to visit sites associated with Napoleon Bonaparte. Such narratives are
                conveyed less than optimally in traditional print publications, at least partly
                because cost considerations would prohibit inclusion of full-color plates for
                presenting such an obscure collection. These texts and collections have been
                digitized as part of the Wheaton College Digital History Project.

            
Digital presentation allows interactive viewing of the document images that we
                suggest might approximate the series of experiences that led to collection of the
                ephemera and specimens for the herbaria alongside the recording of the travel
                journal. Further, including links to images of the primary sources introduces a kind
                of transparency that is missing from traditional print methods for presenting
                results of historical research. Digital presentation enhances the historian’s
                ability to recreate a past that all too often remains obscure — a set of events from
                daily life that includes not only the experiences of well-to-do tourists who created
                and collected the items in archival collections but also the boardinghouse keepers,
                laundresses, and shopkeepers with whom they interacted. Digitally presented history
                can be social history at its best.

            

                Financial Records
                
Beyond its local interest for friends and alumni of Wheaton College, the project
                    has larger historical value in its attention to the 1862 journey in the context
                    of changing economic conditions in Great Britain, Europe, and the United States
                    in the mid-nineteenth century. The group of travelers who created the archive
                    presented in this poster/demo combined business with tourism while in London, as
                    the two men shared interest in the production of straw hats. Holman took with
                    him on the journey a prototype that demonstrated his innovation for machines
                    used to shape the crowns of hats, and he established residency in London to
                    begin the process of registering a patent for his machine. A patent drawing has
                    been found at the British Library. While Holman continued to board in London,
                    Eliza Baylies Wheaton and her husband toured in the south and west of England
                    and in the south of Wales, and they traveled in Europe for two and a half weeks
                    in July 1862. 

                
The journey also represented a transitional moment in the economic experiences of
                    a well-to-do white woman from the United States. The poster/demo thus builds on
                    and contributes to the growing historical literature about Anglo-American women
                    and their economic lives in North America in the eighteenth and nineteenth
                    centuries. Like many articles and monographs, this portion of the project
                    focuses on the records left by an individual, digging down into the archival
                    record to explore the financial details of a moment in one woman’s life and
                    explicate their larger historical significance.

                
The ephemera that the Wheatons collected included such seemingly mundane
                    materials as laundry lists, boarding accounts, and receipts from restaurants and
                    hotels. Such materials resemble the household accounts that Eliza B. Wheaton was
                    accustomed to keeping at home, and they demonstrate her continued responsibility
                    for economic interactions with women workers while she and her husband and their
                    traveling companion were away from home. Examining her household accounts
                    alongside the social narrative she created in the travel journal demonstrates
                    parallels between the pleasant tasks of sociability and the more quotidian
                    concerns of housekeeping, whether Wheaton was at home or away. The herbaria add
                    still another dimension, augmenting comments in the travel journal on such
                    engineering feats as the Thames tunnel with botanical specimens identified
                    according to the historical or cultural sites where they were collected to offer
                    a view of the traveler as scientific collector, of both facts and specimens.

                
Since Eliza B. Wheaton was widowed three years after she and her husband returned
                    to their home in Massachusetts, the financial records from the European journey
                    document a significant moment in her economic life. They supplement a large
                    number of cashbooks and other financial documents that she accumulated over the
                    next forty years. Collected during a transitional period after she had begun to
                    learn the details of her husband’s business affairs, the 1862 receipts suggest
                    the kinds of financial responsibilities to which Wheaton was accustomed during
                    her marriage and the preparation that keeping household accounts gave her for
                    handling her investments and managing her wealth after her husband’s death. The
                    travel journal and herbaria combine with other ephemera to document the
                    interests that she shared with her beloved husband and the pleasures of their
                    European adventure. The richness of this documentary collection and its multiple
                    genres make digital publication the most appropriate method of
                    dissemination.

            

            

                Itineraries
                
In our exploration of the documents and ephemera that survive from the 1862
                    journey, we spent considerable time focused on our travelers’ itineraries and
                    how we know them, paying special attention to what the materials in the
                    collection do and do not tell us. Eliza Baylies Wheaton’s travel journal is
                    incomplete and is only one of many items in the collection that document the
                    Wheatons’ European summer. We have used the collection’s ephemera — which
                    include trade cards, lists, and notes, in addition to the receipts, herbaria,
                    and boarding accounts — to fill in gaps in the account of the journeys contained
                    in the travel journal. Our poster/demo includes images of these documents and
                    their XML coded transcriptions. 

                
The travel journal stopped after a description of a journey to Windsor on May 29,
                    1862, and then picked up again in mid-July when the Wheatons crossed the English
                    Channel to the Continent. Eliza Baylies Wheaton’s herbaria show us that during
                    June, she and her husband traveled around southern England with London as their
                    base. The herbaria have posed particular challenges for scanning, transcription,
                    coding, and interpretation. Although none of the pages are dated, they reveal
                    the couple’s itineraries outside London and act as a nineteenth-century version
                    of a photo album. The herbaria also raise questions about the sites the Wheatons
                    actually visited; Italy was a particular puzzle.

                
The Wheaton Family Papers includes a copy of Samuel Rogers’s 
Italy: A Poem
, an example of popular culture in the United States
                    connected to European tourism in the mid-nineteenth century. The book’s presence
                    in the collection suggests that Eliza Baylies Wheaton understood the importance
                    of Italy as the focus of European tourism since the beginnings of the Grand
                    Tour. Yet other than the herbaria, there are no documents from the journey to
                    suggest our travelers’ presence in Italy. Whilst the herbaria once led us to
                    believe that the Wheatons visited Florence, Rome and Pompeii, our parsing of
                    their itinerary through surviving hotel receipts precluded the possibility of
                    their having had time to visit Italy during this trip. Perhaps most
                    significantly as we sought to understand our travelers’ motivations and actions,
                    we considered the political instability of Italy in 1862, noting that
                    Garibaldi’s army marched on Rome in July and August. Herbaria pages regarding
                    Rome include pasted-in images, apparently cut from a set of small photographs,
                    probably because the Wheatons did not actually see these sites.

                
Our reading of the laundry lists and boarding house receipts combines with our
                    parsing of the European itinerary to tell particular stories about the Wheatons’
                    travels in England and Europe in the spring and summer of 1862. Our being able
                    to display images and transcriptions of the primary documents alongside our
                    interpretations gives audiences the opportunity to weigh our analysis and
                    comment upon it in ways that are quite foreign to the usual methods of
                    presenting historical analysis.

            

        
        

                
Bendixen, Alfred
Hamera, Judith
2009
Cambridge Companion to American Travel Writing
Cambridge University Press
New York
Boydston, Jeanne
1990
Home and Work: Housework, Wages, and the Ideology of Labor
                            in the Early Republic
Oxford University Press
New York
Buzard, James
1993
The Beaten Track: European Tourism, Literature, and the
                            Ways to Culture, 1800-1918
Clarendon Press
Oxford
Cohen, Daniel J.
Rosenzweig, Roy
2006
Digital History: A Guide to Gathering, Preserving, and
                            Presenting the Past on the Web
University of Pennsylvania Press
Philadelphia
De la Peña, Carolyn
Vaidhyanathan, Siva
2006
Special Issue: Rewiring the "Nation": The Place
                            of Technology in American Studies
American Quarterly
58/3
555-985
Dublin, Thomas
1994
Transforming Women’s Work: New England Lives in the
                            Industrial Revolution
Cornell University Press
Ithaca, N.Y.
Earhart, Amy
Mapping Concord: Google Maps and the 19th-Century Concord
                            Digital Archive
dhq: digital humanities quarterly
Elliott, Tom, and Sean Gillies
Digital Geography and Classics
dhq: digital humanities quarterly
Gamber, Wendy
1997
The Female Economy: The Millinery and Dressmaking Trades,
                            1860-1930
University of Illinois Press
Urbana, Illinois
Gamber, Wendy
2007
The Boardinghouse in Nineteenth-Century America
The Johns Hopkins University Press
Baltimore
Ginzberg, Lori D. 
1990
Women and the Work of Benevolence: Morality, Politics, and
                            Class in the 19
th
-Century United States
Yale University Press
New Haven, Conn.
Hartigan-O’Connor, Ellen
2005
Abigail’s Accounts: Economy and Affection in the Early
                            Republic
Journal of Women’s History
17/3
35-58
Helmreich, Paul C.
2002
Wheaton College, 1834-1957: A Massachusetts Family
                            Affair
Cornwall Books
New York
Jensen, Joan
1986
Loosening the Bonds: Mid-Atlantic Farm Women,
                            1750-1850
Yale University Press
New Haven, Conn.
Kelley, Mary
2006
Learning to Stand and Speak: Women, Education, and Public
                            Life in America’s Republic
University of North Carolina Press
Chapel Hill, N.C.
Kelly, Catherine
1999
In the New England Fashion: Reshaping Women’s Lives in the
                            Nineteenth Century
Cornell University Press
Ithaca, N.Y.
Knowles, Anne Kelly, ed.
2002
Past Time, Past Place: GIS for History
ESRI Press
Redlands, California
Knowles, Anne Kelly, ed.
2008
Placing History: How Maps, Spatial Data, and GIS Are
                            Changing Historical Scholarship
ESRI Press
Redlands, California
Luton Public Museum
1933
The Romance of the Straw Hat, Being a History of the
                            Industry and a Guide to the Collections
Luton Public Museum
Luton
Matson, Cathy
2006
Women’s Economies in North America before 1820: Special
                            Forum Introduction
Early American Studies
4/2
271-290
Millar, Marla R.
2006
The Needle’s Eye: Women and Work in the Age of
                            Revolution
University of Massachusetts Press
Amherst, Mass.
Nash, Margaret
2005
Women’s Education in the United States, 1780-1840
Palgrave Macmillan
New York
Nead, Lynda
2000
Victorian Babylon: People, Streets, and Images in
                            Nineteenth-Century London
Yale University Press
New Haven, Conn.
Paine, Harriet E.
1907
The Life of Eliza Baylies Wheaton: A Chapter in the History
                            of the Higher Education of Women
Riverside
Cambridge
Rogers, Samuel
1842
Italy: A Poem
Edward Moxon
London
Schreibman, Susan, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth, eds.
2004
Companion to Digital Humanities
Blackwell
Oxford
Schriber, Mary Suzanne
1997
Writing Home: American Women Abroad, 1830-1920
University of Virginia Press
Charlottesville
Stansell, Christine
1982
City of Women: Sex and Class in New York, 1789-1860
Knopf
New York
Thomas, William G., and Edward L. Ayers
2003
The Differences Slavery Made: A Close Analysis of Two
                            American Communities
American Historical Review
108/5
1299-1307
Ulrich, Laurel Thatcher
1990
A Midwife’s Tale: The Life of Martha Ballard, Based on Her
                            Diary
Vintage
New York
Wulf, Karin
2000
Not All Wives: Women of Colonial Philadelphia
Cornell University Press
Ithaca, New York

        