
                
With this poster, we would like to lay out our vision for DARIAH and first steps
                    towards its realization. DARIAH (Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts
                    and Humanities; 
http://www.dariah.eu
) is a European project funded
                    under the ESFRI programme (
http://cordis.europa.eu/esfri/
),
                    which aims to conceptualise and afterwards build a virtual bridge between
                    different humanities and arts resources across Europe. DARIAH is currently in
                    its preparatory phase, which will design the infrastructure and build a sound
                    business and governmental model. From 2011, DARIAH will begin its construction
                    phase.

                
DARIAH starts off with the observation that just like astronomers require a
                    virtual observatory to study the stars and other distant objects in the galaxy,
                    researchers in the arts and humanities need a digital infrastructure to bring
                    together and collaboratively work with dispersed scholarly resources (e.g.
                    digital content, services, methodologies). DARIAH will be such an infrastructure
                    with a European dimension. Its aim is to bring together various national
                    infrastructures, such as the UK’s arts and humanities e-Science initiative
                    projects (
http://www.ahessc.ac.uk/
) and the German e-Humanities
                    infrastructure TextGrid (
http:///www.textgrid.de
). DARIAH has also helped to
                    found the Coalition of Humanities and Arts Infrastructures and Networks (CHAIN),
                    an international group of arts and humanities infrastructure initiatives.

                
DARIAH will be an infrastructure to promote, support, and advance research in the
                    digital humanities. Digital humanities is a long-established research field,
                    with its origins in the Forties of the last century. Over the past 60 years it
                    has progressed and a large variety of digital humanities centres and related
                    organizations have developed. However, we do not perceive the digital humanities
                    to be a closed field of existing centres but rather an open and developing
                    research environment. Everybody interested in using digital means for arts and
                    humanities research is part of the DARIAH community of practice. In this view,
                    the DARIAH infrastructure would be a connected network of people, information,
                    tools and methodologies for investigating, exploring and supporting work across
                    the broad spectrum of the digital humanities.

                
The DARIAH network will be designed to be as decentralised as possible,
                    empowering individual contributors (e.g. individual researchers; national
                    centers; specialised, thematic centers) to work with and within the DARIAH
                    community and shape its features as to their needs. Each contribution of each
                    contributor builds DARIAH, linked together in DARIAH's architecture of
                    participation. At the same time, however, collaboration across the borders of
                    individual centers requires the usage of common technologies e.g. for
                    authentication or federation of archive contents.

                
DARIAH is about the 
(re-)use
 of digital research resources
                    by anybody and anywhere. By providing data for anybody’s use, it is an
                    e-Research environment. With regard to standards to foster interoperability of
                    content and compatibility of tools, DARIAH will not prescribe but encourage.
                    Researchers do not 
have to
 support interoperability and
                    openness, but they 
may want
 to support and benefit from
                    opportunities such as collaboration and re-usability facilitated by
                    interoperability and openness. DARIAH provides community-driven recommendations
                    and fosters interoperability and collaboration through incentives. This approach
                    means less central control over what DARIAH contains and provides.

                
When DARIAH is operational after the construction phase, technical products by
                    DARIAH will be manifold: 
technological services and tutorials that help existing humanities
                            data archives to link their systems into the DARIAH network
a package of software and consultancy/training, which supports
                            emerging data centres in establishing their own technology environment
                            quickly
an interoperability layer that will connect data centres
means of linking into DARIAH for those countries / disciplines that do
                            not yet have e-Humanities infrastructure and cannot afford it in the
                            near future
best practices and guidelines for individual researchers that foster
                            data interoperability and preservation across the DARIAH network

                
We imagine DARIAH therefore to be not one large infrastructure but more a means
                    of linking up people, services and data for research in arts and humanities.
                    Most likely, DARIAH will not be one technical solution but many, according to
                    community needs and willingness to collaborate. And it is in this context that
                    engaging with the active and vibrant community of international digital
                    humanists is high on DARIAH's list of priorities. DARIAH is engaged in
                    important, in-depth work in modelling research needs and behaviours, the results
                    of which will inform the further development of DARIAH.

                
We think that the definition in the DuraSpace midterm report on what is a
                    repository also fits DARIAH: “trusted intermediary that makes content (…) usable
                    with a menu of added-value services”. Of course DARIAH will not be one large
                    repository, but otherwise the idea of a trusted intermediary fits well.

                
DARIAH will make an important contribution towards e-humanities, providing
                    additional services to analyse, annotate and share arts and humanities research
                    activities. DARIAH will stimulate and provide expertise on all aspects of
                    e-humanities, from best practices for digitisation to metadata standards and
                    advice on analysis methods and systems.

            

        
       

    