This paper will demonstrate the effectiveness of the linkage between textual data and
                image data in the field of medieval Japanese history where the research primarily
                uses text-based documents instead of photocopies and digital images.

            

                Using Computers and Data for Historical Studies
                
The current state of the field of Japanese history requires that researchers (1)
                    view more historical documents than in the past, (2) fully utilize the various
                    types of information contained in these documents such as the form of a
                    character, handwriting, type of paper etc., and (3) collaborate with others on
                    inter-disciplinary projects instead of pursuing isolated projects in a single
                    field. It is not possible to realize these goals through the individual efforts
                    of researchers. A well-established digital environment becomes necessary. The
                    most important and fundamental research tasks for a historian include: (1)
                    looking up certain texts: what documents include these and where in the
                    documents they can be found, and (2) examining the target documents. Given the
                    nature of such research work, the utilization of computers is not as advanced as
                    it should be. Without a fully computerized environment to enable easy access,
                    the groundwork of identifying and reviewing documents would take considerable
                    time and effort, and thus impede the advancement of research. If images and
                    texts of documents are digitally connected, by searching keywords or sentences,
                    the system will display the target texts directly as a part of the image, and
                    users would also be able call up lists of entire images by inputting single
                    characters

            

            

                Semantic information and visual information of Historical Documents
                
In the field of history, most commonly circulated materials are published in
                    traditional printed media such as reprints of texts. Historical documents that
                    have not been reprinted are used only when they are significant for specific
                    research projects. For historical studies, much of the emphasis is on the
                    interpretation and analysis of primary texts, and reprints of primary material,
                    in plain text form, are often used for such purposes.

                
Inevitably, certain information such as the original handwriting will be lost in
                    the process of transforming the original into plain text. In addition,
                    handwritten material published during the pre-modern period used numerous
                    variants of Chinese characters (
異体字
) different from modern
                    publishing standards. Many of the variations of old characters are not
                    represented by computerized fonts and thus are often lost in the conversion into
                    text files. Kunten (
訓点
), the punctuation marks to read
                    Chinese text (Chinese classics, sutras translated to Chinese, etc.) in Japanese
                    pronunciation and grammatical order, are represented by special symbols. For
                    research using this type of document, simple text files are not enough. The
                    primary material needs to be converted into image files.

                
In other words, historical documents contain semantic information that can be
                    converted into text files as well as visual information that cannot be
                    represented in text files.

            

            

                Possibilities of Visual information
                
To use handwriting data as an example, historical documents often do not indicate
                    the author’s name. Even in cases when a signature is included, it can often be
                    the person who authorized the document and not necessarily the actual penman.
                    For this reason handwriting becomes an important piece of information to
                    determine the composer of the document. Graphology analysis can reveal answers
                    to the following questions: (1) who manually composed this document, (2) why did
                    this person write this document, and (3) what other documents have possibly been
                    written by the same person? In conjunction with content analysis
                    (interpretation), these additional aspects can further advance historical and
                    diplomatic research. Introducing imagery analysis to research that has been
                    centered on textual analysis will no doubt lead to new developments.

            

            

                Computer Environment for Handling Historical Documents
                
Although researchers have long recognized the importance of visual information,
                    limited research has been done in these directions. One main reason for this is
                    the lack of a well-developed digital environment, which has made such work
                    highly labor intensive.

                
In order to make searching digitized images just as convenient as searching
                    digitized text, images need to be organized based on the questions of “what
                    character is contained in what part of which document.” It will also be
                    necessary to provide easy to understand results that will highlight searching
                    characters or text within the image. To enable such functions, text data needs
                    to be correlated with image data through coordinates by each character. In other
                    words, three types of input are needed to set up this coordinate system: (1)
                    Which document text does this image correspond to? (2) What characters or words
                    are included in the text? (3) Where in the image are the search words? Two of
                    these inputs, the image data and the text data, are already in common use. If
                    every individual character of the text can be linked to the image through a
                    coordinate system, it will enable text searches within the image of a
                    document.

            

            

                Text-image Management Tool and File Sharing/Exchange via Portable
                    Devices
                
Researchers need to build an easily accessible digital environment with the
                    documents and images of the documents and would thus find it useful to have a
                    tool that could indicate the position in the original documents for a given text
                    of interest. We are currently developing a tool that processes image files of
                    text documents in this way (Fig. 1). Using this tool, a researcher, by clicking
                    on any character in the image, can create information about the character such
                    as its position within the image. As shown in figure 2, the data created for
                    each character including ID (automatically generated GUID), position in the
                    text, coordinates, dimensions and so on are made into a simple text file that
                    can be managed by external software applications like Excel.

                
Figure 1
                    
Figure 2
                    
The program can generate reduced images for viewing in a browser and an HTML file
                    containing information of the positions of the characters. When users search for
                    a string of characters, a Javascript function will highlight the search results
                    on the generated HTML file for display (Fig. 3).

                
Figure 3
                    
The process of connecting these two sets of information cannot be automated and
                    is dependent on manual input, which will inflict certain costs. Moreover, since
                    the productivity of data processing by individuals is limited, group
                    collaboration is essential. For the sake of simpler file sharing, this software
                    thus creates one single file in TIFF format that combines the image data and the
                    text data files. This enables the sharing of text data and image files through
                    the exchange of just one file, an image file embedded with text data through a
                    portable device. Moreover, on the receivers’ end, it will be possible for all
                    the image files of the individual characters and the HTML files needed for
                    searching text strings to be generated from the one text-data embedded image
                    file, eventually making all of these exchanges unnecessary.

            

            

                Publishing on the Web
                
Although owners of the documents are often unwilling to publish the images of
                    their documents on the Web, it is still necessary to develop a network friendly
                    environment for those documents to be published. Such an environment consists of
                    web servers, databases, and web applications that connect them. Since the system
                    needs to be user-friendly for the researcher, there is a tool for importing
                    image files with embedded textual data as mentioned previously by a simple
                    drag-and-drop function. Once the file is dragged and dropped into the tool, it
                    will generate the following: (1) an image for display on the Web (2) coordinate
                    axes for this image (3) partitioning of the image for zooming and update
                    temporary text/index data in the database server. Then the image file and
                    textual data will be ready for publication on the web.

            

            

                Conclusion
                
This method uses data collected and compiled by individual researchers on their
                    personal computers. Data sharing is done through external portable devices. Data
                    sharing via external portable devices may cause delays in distributing the data,
                    prevent other collaborators from referring to updated information, and
                    ultimately cause inconsistencies in data references. The inconvenience of
                    external portable devices may lead to situations where the data are not updated
                    at all on the computers of other collaborators. To avoid these situations it is
                    important to take advantage of the online environment. However, sometimes owners
                    do not want researchers to put images of their historical documents in the
                    environment. This paper demonstrates how to deal with such situations.

            

        
    