The poster will present my work-in-progress PhD project of a 15
th
-century bilingual medical manuscript, containing Latin and Middle English.
                The edition is designed with the needs of historical linguistics in mind, and will
                have some corpus functionalities. My long term aim is to use it as a pilot study of
                sorts in contrastive investigation of Latin and Middle English medical writing.

            

                Background
                
Medieval medical writing for a long period of time received fairly little
                    attention. For instance, Robbins described it, in 1970, as a “Yukon territory
                    crying out for exploration”. In the 1990s and 2000s, the situation has changed,
                    and the field is becoming filled with tiny flags stating the claims of various
                    research projects and individual scholars. There are now large electronic
                    corpora such as the 
Middle English Medical Texts
 (MEMT),
                    published 2005, and 
A Corpus of Middle English Scientific
                        Prose
, currently being compiled in collaboration between the University
                    of Malaga and Hunter Library in Glasgow. 

                
These resources do, however, have one inherent bias. They focus on Middle English
                    material, which gives a distorted view of the linguistic situation in England in
                    the late Middle Ages. England, after the Norman conquest, was a trilingual
                    society in which educated members of the society were likely to have at least
                    some degree of literacy in Latin, Anglo-Norman French as well as English. This
                    shows, for instance, in the fact that manuscripts containing texts in more than
                    one language outnumber monolingual ones. (
cf.
                        Voigts 1989
). Moreover, marginal comments also suggest they had a
                    readership competent in more than one language.

                
My PhD project is intended as the first genuinely bilingual online resource of
                    medical manuscripts in late Medieval England, and will hopefully pave the way
                    for similar resources in the future. It is designed for both historical
                    linguists and historians, but paying special attention to the needs of
                    linguistics.

            

            

                Trinity College Cambridge, MS O.1.77.
                
Trinity MS O.1.77. is a pocket-sized (75 x 100 mm) medical handbook, located in
                    Trinity College Cambridge. It contains 10 to 18 texts on medicine, astrology and
                    alchemy. It is usually treated as a sibling MS of the so-called Sloane-group of
                    Middle English manuscripts, which is a group of late Latin, English and French
                    MSS originating from London or Westminster in the late Middle English period
                        (
cf. e.g. Voigts 1990
). James
                    assigns MS Trinity O.1.77 an exact date 1460, based on astrological markings in
                    the final flyleaf (1902), although it may not be entirely accurate. (see 
Honkapohja 2010, forthcoming
)

                
Roughly 4/5 of the manuscript is in Latin and 1/5 in English, that is, out of
                    slightly less than 30,000 words, c. 24,000 words are Latin and 5,500 in English.
                    There does not appear to be a clear-cut division between prestigious Latin texts
                    and more popular English ones. Latin, however, is used almost exclusively for
                    metatextual functions such as incipits and explicits. Nearly all marginal
                    comments in the manuscript are in Latin.

            

            

                The digital edition
                
The digital edition which I am preparing will be designed in such a way that it
                    will function as reliable data for historical linguistics. This involves
                    encoding a sufficient amount of detail on linguistic variants without
                    normalising, modernising, or emending the data, and keeping all editorial
                    interference transparent (see e.g. 
Kytö, M.,
                        Grund P. and Walker T. 2007
 or 
Lass
                        2004
)

                
 On the technical side, I am using TEI P5 –conformant XML tagging built on
                    stand-off architecture. Things included in the base-level annotation are a
                    graphemic transcription of the text (
cf. e.g.
                        Fenton & Duggan 2006
), select manuscript features such as layout,
                    and information about the manuscript and hand. Each word will also be tagged
                    with a normalised form, useful for linguistic research, and an ID which allows
                    the addition of additional tagging by means of stand-off annotation – including,
                    for instance, POS tagging, semantic annotation or lemmatisation.

                
The edition will have an online user interface, which will allow the user to
                    select the level of detail he or she wishes. It will be possible to use it with
                    either normalised text or diplomatic transcription. It will be released under a
                    Creative Commons license. The user will have full access to the XML-code,
                    including all levels of annotation, and will be allowed to download and modify
                    it for non-commercial purposes.

            

            

                DECL
                
The development of the edition will take place in collaboration between the
                    Digital Editions for Corpus Linguistics (DECL) project based at the University
                    of Helsinki.

                
The DECL project was started by three post-graduate students in 2007. It aims to
                    create a framework for producing online editions of historical manuscripts
                    suitable for both corpus linguistic and historical research. DECL editions use a
                    more strictly defined subset of the TEI-guidelines and are designed especially
                    to meet the needs of corpus linguistics. The framework consists of encoding
                    guidelines compliant with TEI XML P5. The aims of the project are presented in
                    more detail in our article (
Honkapohja,
                        Kaislaniemi & Marttila 2009
).

            

            

                Digital Edition of O.1.77 as a resource for the study of bilingualism
                
My PhD project has both short and long term goals related to the study of
                    multilingualism. The short term aim is to design the edition in a way that is of
                    maximum use for scholars working with medical texts and especially
                    multilingualism. I am especially putting a lot of effort into interoperability
                    and making the encoding as flexible as possible.

                
Hypothetical research questions for the edition will include, for instance: 
Spelling variation.
 Using the edition will enable
                            getting information on spelling variation in English and Latin, in order
                            to see whether the accepted general view that Latin was more regular is
                            supported by quantitative data. 
The use of brevigraphs and contracted forms.
 Manuscript
                            abbreviations are an extremely common feature in the Latin texts of the
                            manuscript. They are also applied in the Middle English sections, but
                            with less frequency. The edition will make it possible to obtain exact
                            statistical information on which manuscript abbreviations carry into the
                            vernacular, and with how much variation and frequency.
Syntactic complexity:
 Do sentences in Latin contain a
                            greater number of sub clauses and other signs of syntactic complexity
                            than Middle English ones?
Textual Functions:
 The use of English and Latin in
                            various text types, recipes, metatextual passages (in which Latin very
                            much dominates). The type of structural and background information which
                            is being annotated in the edition will enable the user to perform the
                            searches on different level textual passages, including marginal
                            comments and metatextual passages.

                
After the completion of the PhD project, the edition will be expanded with other
                    related multilingual medical and alchemical manuscripts in the Sloane group,
                    which will increase the usefulness of the database, by allowing, for instance,
                    comparative study of the same text in different manuscripts. I am also planning
                    to make use of the available corpora on Middle English medical writing for
                    comparisons to Middle English.

            

        
        

                
A Corpus of Middle English Scientific Prose
Being compiled at the
University of Malaga
13 March 2010
Fenton, E. G.
Duggan, H. N.
2006
Effective Methods of Producing Machine-readable Text from
                            Manuscript and Print Sources
Burnard, L.
O’Brien O’Keeffe, K.
Unsworth, J.
Electronic Textual Editing
New York
MLA
Honkapohja, A.
Kaislaniemi, S.
Marttila, V.
2009
Digital Editions for Corpus Linguistics: Representing
                            manuscript reality in electronic corpora
Jucker, A. H.
Schreier, D.
Hundt, M.
Corpora: Pragmatic and Discourse. Papers from the 29th
                            Internationl Conference on English Language Research on Computerized
                            Corpora (ICAME 29). Ascona, Switzerland, 14-18 May 2008
Amsterdam/New York
Rodopi
Honkapohja, A.
2010: forthcoming
Multilingualism in Trinity College Cambridge Manuscript
                            O.1.77
Studia Anglica Posnaniensia
James, M. R.
1902
The Western Manuscripts in the Library of Trinity College,
                            Cambridge. A Descriptive Catalogue
III, Containing an Account of the Manuscripts Standing
                            in Class O
Cambridge
CUP
Lass, R.
2004
Ut custodiant litteras: Editions, Corpora and
                            Witnesshood
Dossena, M.
Lass, R.
Methods and Data in English Historical Dialectology
Linguistic Insights
16
Bern
Peter Lang
Robbins, R.H.
1970
Medical Manuscripts in Middle English
Speculum
45
No.3 Jul 1970
393-415
13 March 2010
Middle English Medical Texts
2005
Taavitsainen, I.
Pahta, P.
Mäkinen, M.
CD-ROM
Amsterdam
: 
John Benjamins
Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)
13 March 2010
Voigts, L. E.
1989
Scientific and Medical Books
Griffiths, J.
Pearsall, D.
Book Production and Publishing in Britain 1375-1475
Cambridge
: 
Cambridge University
                            Press
Voigts, L. E.
1990
The "Sloane Group": Related scientific and medical
                            manuscripts from the fifteenth century in the Sloane Collection
The British Library Journal
16
26-57
Kytö, M.
Grund P.
Walker T.
2007
Regional variation and the language of English witness
                            depositions 1560-1760: constructing a 'linguistic' edition in electronic
                            form
Pahta, P.
Taavitsainen, I.
Nevalainen, T.
Tyrkkö, J.
Towards Multimedia in Corpus Studies. Studies in Variation
                            Contacts and Change in English
2
Helsinki
Research Unit for Variation, Contacts and Change in English
                            (VARIENG)
, University of Helsinki 
13 March 2010

        