Before the age of printing, texts were copied manually only. This was done by
                    scribes – persons who made a copy of a text for their own use or for the use of
                    others. Often, the original is no longer available. All that remain are copies
                    of the text, or copies of copies of copies. We know that scribes made mistakes,
                    and that they changed spellings and wording according to what they thought fit
                    for their audience. And we know that they sometimes reworked the text or parts
                    thereof. 

                
Up till now, these insecurities may have made medieval texts less interesting to
                    work on for digital humanists. However, the complex world of medieval textual
                    copying is a very challenging topic in its own right. Recently, some scholars
                    have tried to develop and apply digital methods and techniques to gain insight
                    in manual text transmission. In this session, they will explain which specific
                    research questions led to their approach, and why traditional methods did not
                    suffice. Then they will describe the digital approach they developed, how they
                    gathered their data, and present the first results. They will sketch the next
                    steps for their research and reflect on which larger questions may come closer
                    to an answer, and which other areas of digital humanities will benefit from this
                    research. 

                
The first paper (by Jacob Thaisen) will focus on how the variability of spelling
                    characteristic of Middle English makes probabilistic models a powerful tool for
                    distinguishing scribes and exemplars. The second paper (by Karina van
                    Dalen-Oskam) goes into vocabulary and frequencies of parts of speech, as a means
                    to get insight in the influence scribes exerted on the texts they copied. The
                    third paper (by Mike Kestemont) aims at erasing or minimizing textual
                    differences in order to assess stability and the persistence of authorial
                    features of manually copied medieval texts. 

            
        
With the Norman Conquest of 1066 written English ceased to be employed for
                    administrative and other official purposes, and the normative spelling
                    conventions established for the West Saxon variety of Old English fell into
                    disuse. When the language eventually regained these crucial domains around three
                    centuries later, a norm for how to spell English no longer existed. The only
                    models available to scribes were the practices of other languages known to them
                    or, increasingly as English strengthened its position, the conventions adopted
                    in the exemplars from which they copied. As a result of the interaction of all
                    these factors, Middle English—the English of the period from the Battle of
                    Hastings to Caxton's introduction of printing from movable type in 1476—is
                    characterized by considerable variation in spelling, even within the output of a
                    single individual. There is nothing at all unusual about one and the same scribe
                    of this period representing one and the same word in more than one way,
                    including very frequent words such as the definite article and conjunctions.
                    Moreover, scribes could use the variability to their advantage in carrying out
                    the copying task, for example, to adjust the length of lines or speed up the
                    copying process. 

                
The variability of Middle English orthography means it would be misguided to
                    assume that two texts penned by a single scribe necessarily follow, or should
                    follow, identical spelling conventions. They are much more likely to exhibit
                    variation within bounds. Any stylometric attribution of Middle English texts to
                    a single scribe or of portions of a text in a single scribal hand to different
                    exemplars on the basis of spelling must take this nature of the evidence into
                    account. The probabilistic methods known from statistically-based machine
                    translation, spell-checking, optical character recognition, and other natural
                    language processing applications are specifically designed to recognize patterns
                    in "messy" data and generalize on the basis of them. It is the purpose
                    of this paper to demonstrate that this property of these methods makes them
                    adequate stylometric discriminators of unique orthographies. 

                
The methodologies developed in connection with the preparation of 
A Linguistic Atlas of Late Medieval English
 (McIntosh,
                    Samuels, et al. 1986) separate unique orthographies by manual and predominantly
                    qualitative means; if quantitative data are collected at all, they are subjected
                    only to simple statistical tests. Since texts differ lexically, they are not
                    readily comparable in all respects. The 
Atlas
 solution is
                    to generate comparability by restricting the investigation to the subset of the
                    respective lexicons of the various texts they may reasonably be expected to
                    share, such as function words. Spelling forms for these words are collected from
                    samples of the texts by selective questionnaire and any pattern present in their
                    distribution detected by visual inspection. The forms are further often analyzed
                    by reference to known dialect markers. The latter translates as the researcher
                    relating the forms to phonological and morphological variables, although there
                    is recognition in the dialectological literature that geographic significance
                    too may characterize other levels of language. 

                
However, it is now practically feasible to estimate the full orthography of which
                    a given text is a sample by building probabilistic models. The reason is that
                    recent years have witnessed an increase in the amount of diplomatically
                    transcribed manuscript materials available in digital form, which makes it
                    possible to abandon the qualitative focus. Scholars are already subjecting the
                    lexical variation present in similar materials to sophisticated
                    computer-assisted quantitative analysis (Robinson 1997, van Dalen-Oskam and van
                    Zundert 2007). Their studies point the way forward. 

                
The building blocks of Middle English orthographies are not individual letters
                    but sequences of letters of varying length which, further, combine with one
                    another in specific ways, with phonograms, morphograms, and logograms existing
                    side by side. Every Middle English orthography has a slightly different set of
                    building blocks, making 
n
-gram models a good type of
                    probabilistic model for capturing the distinct properties of each. Such a model
                    is simply an exhaustive listing of grams (letters and letter sequences), each
                    with its own probability and weight. 

                
"Perplexity" expresses how well a given model is able to account for
                    the grams found in a text other than the one from which the model itself is
                    derived. That is, a model – itself a list of grams – is compared with a list of
                    the grams found in another text and the measure simply expresses the level of
                    agreement between the two lists. However, to find out whether the two texts are
                    instances of the same orthography, a better model is a model not of the text
                    from which it is derived but of the orthography which that text is a sample of.
                    This is because the lexis of the text means the probabilities of the grams are
                    not those they have in the orthography. This skew can be reduced by generalizing
                    the model. "Smoothing" refers to the act of (automatically)
                    introducing weights to achieve the best possible generalization. 

                
Chen and Goodman (1998) carry out a systematic investigation of how a range of
                    smoothing techniques perform relative to one another on a variety of corpus
                    sizes in terms of the ability to account for test data. Their data come from
                    present-day English and their basic unit is the word rather than, as here, the
                    letter. They find the technique developed by Witten and Bell (1991) consistently
                    to generalize the least effectively, and that developed by Kneser and Ney
                    (1995), and later modified by Chen and Goodman (1998), consistently to do so the
                    most effectively. Both weight every (
n
-1)-gram in
                    proportion to the number of different 
n
-grams in which it
                    occurs in the training data, i.e. in the text on which the model is based in the
                    present case. The former technique produces the effect that the probability mass
                    is shifted toward those grams which best characterize the training data, making
                    it appropriate if the purpose is to distinguish orthographies within the product
                    of a single scribe. The latter does the opposite, thus more fully capturing the
                    full range of forms accepted by the scribe of the training data; this makes it
                    the better choice if the purpose is to compare texts by a range of scribes in
                    terms of their orthographic similarity. 

                
To demonstrate the adequacy of smoothed models as discriminators of Middle
                    English orthographies, the presenter investigates two corpora by means of the
                        
SRI Language Modeling Toolkit
 (Stolcke 2002): 

                
1.
 The copy of Geoffrey Chaucer's unfinished poem 
Canterbury Tales
 contained in Cambridge University
                    Library, MS Gg.4.27 [Gg]; the copy is in a single scribal hand.

                
The Gg text of is divided into equal-sized segments, each of which is
                    subsequently modeled (Witten-Bell smoothing). For every model, its perplexity is
                    computed against every segment other than the segment on which it is based,
                    giving a 19x19 matrix with one blank cell per row. The mean and standard
                    deviation is calculated for each row. 

                

                    
Figure 1
                        
Mean Perplexity and Standard Deviation, by Equal-Size Segment, in
                            Gg

                
As can be seen in Figure 1, the greatest change in mean perplexity between any
                    two consecutive segments falls between sections 7 and 8, with only that change
                    falling outside the confidence intervals indicated by the whiskers. The
                    hypothesis that two distinct populations are present is confirmed statistically
                    (Mann-Whitney, U = 84, n1 = 7, n2 = 12, P < 0.001, two-tailed): thus, Gg
                    contains two orthographies, their boundary falling around segments 7 and 8. The
                    manuscript contains physical evidence of a change of exemplar late in segment 7
                    (Thaisen forthcoming). 

                
2.
 58 pre-1500 manuscript copies of the 
Miller's Tale
 and all fifty-eight such copies of the 
Wife of Bath's Prologue
, totaling 116 texts; a range
                    of scribes are responsible for these copies. 

                
The Toolkit builds a model of every text and smoothes them (Kneser-Ney modified).
                    For every model, its perplexity is calculated with respect to every text. The
                    perplexities are arranged into two matrices for hierarchical clustering, one for
                    the Miller-based models and another for the Wife-based models. 

                
It is found, firstly, that the two trees are virtually mirror images of one
                    another; secondly, that a Miller text and a Wife text which come from the same
                    manuscript usually appear as sisters and that the cases in which they fail to do
                    so are attributable to a change of scribe or exemplar posited on outside
                    evidence (Thaisen 2009). 

                
These results are sufficiently encouraging to warrant the investment of further
                    resources. They show that probabilistic modeling offers a repeatable, quantified
                    means of measuring the level of similarity between Middle English orthographies
                    and so, also, a tool for separating them. That separation is important not only
                    in authorship attribution and textual criticism, but also in manuscript studies
                    and English historical linguistics. Additional advantages over the 
Atlas
 methodologies, which focus on dialect rather than
                    textual studies, are the level of exhaustiveness, since all the available data
                    are considered, as well as simple ease, the input being an unlemmatized
                    transcript in plain text format. 

            
            

                    
Chen, S. F. and Goodman, J. T.
1998
An Empirical Study of Smoothing Techniques for Language
                                Modeling. Technical report TR-10-98
Harvard University
11 March 2010
Kneser, R. and Ney, H. 
1995
Improved Backing-off for m-Gram Language
                                Modeling
Proceedings of the IEEE
                                International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
                                Processing
1
181-84
McIntosh, A., Samuels, M. and Benskin, M.
1986
A Linguistic Atlas of Late Mediaeval English
Aberdeen University Press
Aberdeen
Robinson, P.
1997
A Stemmatic Analysis of the Fifteenth-Century Witnesses
                                to the Wife of Bath's Prologue
The Canterbury Tales Project Occasional Papers: Vol.
                                II
Blake, N. F. and Robinson, P.
Office for Humanities Communication
London
69–132
Stolcke, A.
2002
SRILM: An Extensible Language Modeling Toolkit
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
                                Spoken Language Processing
Hansen, J. and Pellom, B.
Casual Productions
Denver
901–04
Thaisen, J.
2009
Statistical Comparison of Middle English Texts: An
                                Interim Report
Kwartalnik Neofilologiczny
56
205–21
Thaisen, J.
forthcoming
A Probabilistic Analysis of a Middle English
                                Text
Digitizing Medieval and Early Modern Material
                                Culture
Nelson, B. and Terras, M.
Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance
                                Studies
Tempe
Van Dalen-Oskam, K. and van Zundert, J.
2007
Delta for Middle Dutch: Author and Copyist Distinction
                                in Walewein
Literary and Linguistic Computing
22
345–62
Witten, I. H. and Bell, T. C.
1991
The Zero-Frequency Problem: Estimating the
                                Probabilities of Novel Events in Adaptive Text Compression
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory
37
1085–94

            
We know that medieval scribes (women or men manually copying texts) changed the
                    texts they were copying. Scribes not only made mistakes, but also deliberately
                    changed a text's spelling and wording. We also know that they sometimes
                    changed the content of a text, leaving out episodes and adding others, or for
                    instance changing the moral message. In these cases, scholars may want to
                    describe a text not as a copy of another text but as an adaptation of it. It is
                    not exactly clear, though, when to call a text a copy or an adaptation, and how
                    often scribes chose to adapt instead of 'just' copy a text. It is also
                    uncertain if all copies/adaptations of a medieval text survived and how many
                    were lost (and why). To make things even more complicated, the exact date of
                    most medieval manuscripts is uncertain. And in many cases we do not know the
                    identity of the author of the original text or of the scribes.

                

                    Research questions
                    
One of the tasks of scholars of medieval literature is to analyse the
                        adaptations in a copy and to try to explain them in a poetical, ethical, or
                        political context, which is of course difficult if the original version of a
                        text is not extant. However, comparing different copies/adaptations of the
                        same text usually presents scholars with enough data to make relevant
                        observations and draw at least some conclusions. Until now, the depth of the
                        analyses was limited to what the human eye and a scholar's amount of
                        research time allowed. However, digital texts and digital text analysis
                        tools can help us to compare texts in many more aspects than was possible up
                        till now. 

                    
The questions that are of interest to us are: can we compare manual copies of
                        the same text (semi-)automatically and get insight into the divergences
                        which occur? Can we filter out differences that have to do with language
                        development? Can we filter out the influence of subsequent scribes of a text
                        and focus on those aspects which show us the original author most clearly?
                        If so, could we apply (adapted versions of) authorship attribution tools to
                        medieval texts? Could we also distinguish scribes from each other and are
                        they distinguishable in the same or in a different way from how authors can
                        be distinguished from each other? Can we develop new tools or fine-tune
                        existing tools for scribal measurements? And can these measurements decide
                        if a text is a copy or an adaptation and if so, how radical the adaptation
                        is? 

                    
Up till now, scholars hardly ever tried to systematically answer these
                        questions. The necessary amount of work seemed not proportionate to the
                        possible results as long as there still was enough low-hanging fruit in the
                        close-reading type of analysis of text adaptation. Possibly, scholars in the
                        course of time have been trained to NOT ask these impossible-to-answer
                        questions, although two topics have always had a special place in the
                        humanities: building family trees of manuscripts (stemmatology) and
                        authorship attribution based on traditional, close-reading and simple
                        statistical methods. This shows there has always been a keen interest in new
                        and complex methods when they could possibly answer pressing questions.

                

                

                    Data
                    
We would like to introduce two methods which may help scholars to gain
                        insight in the amount of differences between copies of the same text. For
                        this research, we are not interested in mere spelling differences but in
                        more content-related differences. Our area of research is Middle Dutch
                        literature. The first method is a rather simple approach to the vocabulary
                        of all the copies, for which we needed lemmatization of the data, and the
                        second is the comparison of part of speech frequencies in the copies of the
                        same text, which implied a dataset tagged for Part of Speech. A corpus
                        answering these needs was not available yet, so we had to create one first. 

                    
Not many Middle Dutch texts are extant in a substantial number of copies. We
                        chose a work by the Flemish author Jacob van Maerlant: the 
Rijmbijbel
 ('Rhyming Bible'), which is a
                        translation/adaptation of the Medieval Latin 
Historia
                            scholastica
 written by Petrus Comestor. Van Maerlant finished this
                        work in 1271, and many fragments and fifteen near-complete manuscripts
                        (though not all containing all parts of the text) survive, dating from ca.
                        1285 to the end of the fifteenth century. One of these manuscripts is
                        available in a good edition; it is also digitally available lemmatized and
                        tagged for parts of speech. Transcriptions of the other manuscripts had to
                        be made for this research. Because of the length of the texts (almost 35,000
                        lines), we had to work with samples. We chose 5 samples of 200-240 lines
                        from different parts of the text, and transcribed the parallel texts (if
                        available) from all 15 manuscripts, lemmatized the samples and tagged them
                        for parts of speech. The manuscripts are indicated by the letters A, B, C,
                        D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N and O. The lemmas we added to the
                        transcribed texts have the form of the Modern Dutch dictionary entry (or the
                        form the Modern Dutch entry would have had, had the word survived into
                        present-day Dutch). We differentiated between ten parts of speech: noun,
                        proper name, adjective, main verb, copula / auxiliary verb, numeral,
                        pronouns, adverb, preposition, conjunction.

                

                

                    Methods
                    
We approached the samples as 'bags of words'. We made use of perl
                        scripts listing all lemmas and parts of speech for each small sample and for
                        the frequency measurements. For each part of speech, in each sample we
                        measured the absolute frequency, the relative frequency, the average of the
                        fifteen samples, the standard deviation, the z-score and the ranking of the
                        manuscript in comparison with the other fourteen manuscripts.

                

                

                    First results of the comparison of vocabularies
                    
Table 1 below lists the amount of words (lemmas) each text episode has which
                        do not occur in any of the other copies of the same episode: unique words.
                        The manuscripts A - O are listed in chronological order (although many dates
                        are very approximate). The order from left to right agrees with the order of
                        the episodes in the text itself. 

                    

                        
Table 1
                            
The amount of words (lemmas) each text episode has which do not
                                occur in any of the other copies of the same episode: unique words.
                                The manuscripts are listed chronologically.

                    
At a glance we can see that manuscripts E and I show the most unique words.
                        This needs to be investigated: are these scribes the most radical in their
                        adaptations? We will try to push this use of vocabulary analysis further,
                        e.g. measuring the percentage of overlapping vocabulary in the episodes in
                        the different manuscripts.

                

                

                    First results of the comparison of PoS frequencies
                    
Figure 2 shows the relative frequencies of nouns for each of the five samples
                        (E, D, J, M, T) for each of the manuscripts (A - O). For this part of
                        speech, we see a big change in the trend for the episode in all of the
                        manuscripts for episode T in manuscript E and for episode J in manuscript I.
                        Graphs for other parts of speech show the same trend. 

                    

                        
Figure 2
                            
The relative frequencies of nouns for each of the five samples
                                (E, D, J, M, T) for each of the manuscripts (A - O).

                

                

                    Evaluation
                    
Reading the two episodes and comparing them with the other copies of the same
                        text reveals that episode J in manuscript I clearly is a new text. Almost
                        all the rhyme words have been changed, text is added, wording is completely
                        different. The scribe here acted as a new author. This is not the case for
                        episode T in manuscript E. Some rhyme words have changed, some wording is
                        different, but the text is still clearly recognizable as a copy.

                

                

                    Conclusions and next steps
                    
It seems simple comparisons of vocabulary and frequencies of parts of speech
                        can pinpoint scribes who did more than copying their exemplar. If this can
                        be confirmed by other experiments, this approach could help to direct
                        scholars to those episodes in texts that may be most rewarding for a closer
                        analysis (e.g. with traditional methods such as close reading). Before this
                        is possible, however, a lot more medieval texts need to be available tagged
                        for headwords and for part of speech. For that, a good tagger for Middle
                        Dutch is highly desirable. 

                    
The research questions addressed above are key for getting a better insight
                        into the cultural role of texts and the persons responsible for texts and
                        their transmission, not only in the Middle Ages, but also later. It could
                        help us to find a way to less subjectively compare texts and describe
                        scribal adaptations, and in this way yield insight in the possible kinds of
                        text manipulation throughout the ages.

                

            
            

                    
Dalen-Oskam, K. van and Zundert, J. van
2008
The Quest for Uniqueness: Author and Copyist
                                Distinction in Middle Dutch Arthurian Romances based on
                                Computer-assisted Lexicon Analysis
Yesterday's words: contemporary, current and
                                future lexicography. [Proceedings of the Third International
                                Conference on Historical Lexicography and Lexicology (ICHLL), 21-23
                                June 2006, Leiden]
Mooijaart, M.
van der Wal, M.
Cambridge Scholars Publishing
Cambridge
292-304
Dalen-Oskam, K. van and Zundert, J. van
2007
Delta for Middle Dutch – Author and Copyist Distinction
                                in Walewein
Literary and Linguistic Computing
22
345-362
Kestemont, M. and Van Dalen-Oskam, K.
2009
Predicting the Past: Memory-Based Copyist and Author
                                Discrimination in Medieval Epics
Proceedings of the Twenty-first
                                Benelux Conference on Artificial Intelligence (BNAIC 2009)
Eindhoven
2009
121-128
Spencer, M. and Howe, C. J.
2001
Estimating distances between manuscripts based on
                                copying errors
Literary and Linguistic Computing
16
467-484
Spencer, M. and Howe, C. J.
2002
How accurate were scribes? A mathematical model
Literary and Linguistic Computing
17
311-322

            

                    A problem
                    
Modern stylometric approaches can discriminate between authors to a fairly
                        accurate extent. Machine learning techniques, for instance, are able to
                        'recognize' authors – be they literary or not – based on
                        linguistic features extracted from representative textual samples written by
                        these authors. In recent years, computational studies into authorship issues
                        (such as verification and attribution) have been a popular topic in many
                        research areas. Nevertheless, this kind of research has paid rather little
                        attention to medieval literature. This is especially remarkable since it is
                        precisely in this branch of philology that scholars have to contend with
                        large amounts of texts of which the authorship is unknown or at least
                        disputed. This lack of interest in medieval literature seems due to a
                        variety of factors that all come down to the same basic fact: medieval texts
                        are difficult to automatically process. For example, tools to perform basic
                        actions such as the automatic lemmatization of texts are virtually
                        non-existent for medieval languages, while most stylometric approaches
                        heavily rely on e.g. lemma-frequencies for their feature extraction (cf.
                        Burrows's 
Delta
). This is mainly due to the
                        scribal variation that is so typical of medieval manuscripts, as put forward
                        in the introduction to this session proposal. Moreover, medieval texts are
                        rarely extant from autographs and as such, in the majority of the cases,
                        scholars have a hard time assessing which features in manuscriptal copies
                        are 
authorial
 rather than 
scribal
.

                

                

                    A solution
                    
Any solution to the problem of authorship attribution for medieval texts has
                        to overcome the difficulties imposed by the (scribal) instability of text in
                        the Middle Ages. Whereas the other two papers in this session focus on the
                            
exploitation
 of scribal variation (i.e. textual
                            
in
stability), this paper aims at the exact
                        opposite: 
erasing
 or 
minimizing
 these differences in order to assess textual stability
                        and the persistence of authorial features of manually copied medieval texts.
                        In this paper we shall focus on two methods to achieve this goal. Firstly,
                        we shall briefly discuss the MiDL-architecture, a Natural Language
                        Processing system designed for the automated tokenization, lemmatization and
                        part-of-speech tagging of Middle Dutch literary texts. The techniques allow
                        us to get past or 'transcend' superficial scribal variation and
                        focus on the underlying authorial features of texts. 

                    
Secondly, we shall report on experiments with rhyme words and pairs – Middle
                        Dutch epic literature was rhymed in about 99% percent of the cases that are
                        currently known to us. This category of words is often claimed to be a very
                        stable factor during the process of text transmission and thus can be
                        expected to be extremely revealing with regard to authorial style. Scribes
                        could not easily alter the rhyme words or rhyme scheme of a text without
                        having to adapt several lines of the text and would often refrain from doing
                        this. 

                

                

                    A good case study
                    
In authorship related studies, it is often hard to set up an experiment that
                        is entirely 'clean' or 'sterile' from a methodological
                        point of view. If one has to make sure that the 
only

                        difference between two texts is the difference in authorship, one has to
                        keep all other factors (such as gender and education level of the author,
                        topic of the text, ...) as stable as possible over the two texts compared.
                        For the Middle Ages, the poor survival of texts makes it difficult to set up
                        an experiment that fully meets these requirements. For this paper, we shall
                        work on a single case study that does seem to approach this ideal setup as
                        much as possible: the 
Spiegel Historiael
, a Middle
                        Dutch adaptation of the Latin 
Speculum Maius
, by
                        Vincentius of Beauvais. This adaptation was initiated by the influential
                        writer Jacob of Maerlant and was later continued by two other authors: Filip
                        Utenbroeke and Lodewijk van Velthem. Of each of these authors near-complete
                        manuscript copies survive of substantial parts of their contribution to the
                        project, called 
Partien
. Each of these 
partien
 is divided in larger units called 
books
, which in turn consist of smaller 
chapters
. In this study we shall focus on the first
                            
partie
 by Maerlant (31K lines in 532 chapters),
                        the second by Utenbroeke (41K lines in 461 chapters) and the fifth by
                        Velthem (27K lines in 387 chapters). These chapters will be our main
                        comparison unit. What makes this 
Spiegel historiael

                        such an interesting case is that comparing these texts for authorial
                        differences indeed keeps many other factors rather constant, such as level
                        of education, gender, genre, etc.

                

                

                    Preprocessing
                    
As a starting point, we shall briefly discuss the architecture which we have
                        developed for the preprocessing of our texts: the MiDL-system (joint work
                        with Walter Daelemans & Guy de Pauw of the Antwerp Computational
                        Linguistics group, CLiPS). The MiDL-system performs tokenization,
                        lemmatization and Part-Of-Speech tagging for Middle Dutch literary texts.
                        The technology we present is optimized for this specific material but should
                        scale well to other medieval languages (or any resource-scarce language
                        characterized by a lot of spelling variation). In this contribution we shall
                        focus on the 
corpus-Gysseling
 (CG), a corpus that was
                        digitized and semi-automatically annotated at the Institute for Dutch
                        Lexicology (INL). More specifically we shall report on results with the
                        so-called 'literary part' of this corpus (ca. 600K running tokens)
                        that contains all Middle Dutch literature, surviving from manuscripts dated
                        between 1200 and 1300AD. The main issue we will discuss is lemmatization, as
                        we will argue that this step is actually the key to all subsequent
                        operations (such as e.g. PoS-tagging or shallow parsing). 

                    
Lemmatization refers to the process whereby natural language tokens are
                        assigned a 'lemma'. The basic purpose of doing this – in any
                        language or research domain – is that it enables the generalization
                        'about the behaviour of groups of words in cases where their individual
                        differences are irrelevant' (Knowles & Mohd Don 2004:69). Hence,
                        lemmatization can be considered a problem of mapping many-to-one: similar
                        tokens are mapped to the same 'abstract representation' that, as
                        such, comes to subsume 'all the formal lexical variations which may
                        apply' (Crystal 1997). There exists an obvious parallel with the
                        lexicographer's activity of grouping words under the same
                        'dictionary headword' (Ibid.; Knowles & Mohd Don 2004:70).
                        When it comes to medieval languages, the main issue that is to be dealt with
                        are historical spelling variants (HSV). When compared to the problem of
                        lemmatization in modern languages, it adds a level of complexity:

                    

                        
Modern
 LEMMA X = {token
1
, token
2
, ..., token
n-1
, token
n
}X 
Medieval
 LEMMA X = {token
1
={variant
1
1
, variant
2
1
}, token
2
={variant
1
2
, variant
2
2
} ...,
 token
n-1
={variant
1
n-1
, variant
2
n-1
}, token
n
={variant
1
n
, variant
2
n
}} 
The main purpose of lemmatization, as such, lies with a form of token
                        normalization that allows us to transcend superficial spelling
                        variations.

                

                

                    Experiments
                    
In this paper we shall focus on lexical features (n-grams of lemmata) and
                        shallow morpho-syntactic features (n-grams of PoS-tags). Our main research
                        emphasis will be on rhyme words. We will present the results of
                        leave-one-out validation on our data as following. Using a machine learning
                        algorithm, we will do experiments on 
m
 samples by
                        Maerlant, 
n
 samples by Utenbroeke and 
l
 samples by Velthem (with the sample size set to
                        individual chapter entities). During each fold, we will each time
                        'leave out' one chapter by one author (e.g. one by Utenbroeke) and
                        train on the chapters that are left (e.g. 
m

                        Maerlant-samples, 
n-1
 Utenbroeke-samples and 
l
 Velthem-samples). We will 'test' each
                        time the accuracy of our algorithm after training in terms of accuracy:
                        'Can the learner correctly identify by which author the omitted sample
                        was written?'

                

            
            

                    
Biemans, J.A.A.M.
1997
Onsen Speghele Ystoriale in Vlaemsche. Codicologisch
                                onderzoek naar de overlevering van de Spiegel historiael van Jacob
                                van Maerlant, Philips Utenbroeke en lodewijk van Velthem, met een
                                beschrijving van de handschriften en Fragmenten
Peeters
Leuven
Crystal, D.
1997
A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics
Oxford University Press
Oxford
Dalen-Oskam, K. van and Zundert, J. van
2007
Delta for Middle Dutch – Author and Copyist Distinction
                                in Walewein
Literary and Linguistic Computing
22
345-362
Kestemont, M. and Van Dalen-Oskam, K.
2009
Predicting the Past: Memory-Based Copyist and Author
                                Discrimination in Medieval Epics
Proceedings of the Twenty-first
                                Benelux Conference on Artificial Intelligence (BNAIC 2009)
Eindhoven
2009
121-128
Knowles, G. and Mohd Don, Z.
2004
The notion of a "lemma". Headwords, roots and
                                lexical sets
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics
69-81
Luyckx, K. and Daelemans, W.
2008
Authorship Attribution and Verification with Many
                                Authors and Limited Data
Proceedings of the 22nd
                                International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
                                2008)
Manchester
2008
513-520

            