This project located at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin sets out to digitize Dingler’s
                "Polytechnical Journal" ("Polytechnisches Journal"), 1820-1931.
                Aside from the digitization of the journal’s images, we encode the OCRed text
                according to the Text Encoding Initiative Guidelines TEI-P5. Our online edition of
                Dingler’s journal will be freely available on a state-of-the-art system called Goobi
                Digitization Suite, which is a new production and presentation solution funded by
                the DFG (German Research Foundation).

            

                Dingler's Journal
                
In 1820 the German chemist and industrialist J. G. Dingler started publishing the
                    "Polytechnisches Journal". This journal was to include a personal but
                    representative selection of a broad variety of articles. Originally most of
                    these articles had been published in magazines all over Europe and, though most
                    of them originated from the UK, there were also specimens from France, Italy,
                    and Russia.

                
The "Polytechnisches Journal" was published over a period of 111 years.
                    Thus, the journal became an extremely important source for the history of 19th
                    century knowledge, as it is an account of period that included the
                    industrialization, the progress of transport and communication, and the
                    differentiation of various technologies. For instance, the journal covers the
                    discovery of electro-magnetism by Hans Christian Oersted (1820) and the theory
                    of relativity by Albert Einstein (1905/1915). It contains articles on steam
                    engines and locomotives, as well as bicycles and automobiles.

                

                    
Synchronic and diachronic transfer of knowledge and
                            technique
 Articles published in Dingler’s journal give us an
                        example of the emergence of culture in a technical context. In the process
                        of industrialization, new technical achievements profoundly affected
                        everyday life. It is in the interplay of science and knowledge that the
                        journal evolves its epistemic significance. The "Polytechnisches
                        Journal" is unique and highly relevant for very different research
                        fields which focus on the cultural history as it emerged from Europe’s
                        technical transformations. It is significant not only for people engaged in
                        the history of science but for anyone interested in the cultural heritage of
                        Europe.

                

            

            

                Dingler-Online – The encoding
                

                    
Linking
Since Dingler annotated his editorial work
                        very thorougly, we find all necessary metadata on each article contained
                        within the journal. He even went one step further: Dingler cross-referenced
                        other source material on issues inherent to each article. Therefore
                        "linking" is one of the main tasks for enriching the text. Doing
                        this consistently from the very beginning of our project we are aiming at a
                        network of digitized knowledge for that period covering the whole of Europe.
                        Any digitized magazine of a somehow technical background of the 19th century
                        will be interesting to be linked to.

                

                

                    
Indexing
As is true for any non-digitally published
                        magazine, researching the contents of journals is a time consuming task.
                        Right from the beginning Dingler knew he would have to give assistance to
                        those accessing his material, so he compiled an index once a year. In 1843
                        the first so-called "Real-Index" was published, a third-hand work
                        which covered the first 78 volumes of the journal. All in all there are four
                        of these "Real-Indexes".

                    
Based on these two different kinds of indexes as well as our index-related
                        TEI-encoding, we will be able to provide a deeply granulated and dynamically
                        generated index. It will consist of a register of persons (differentiated
                        according to their role, i.e. author, translator, originator etc.), objects,
                        and, among others, those journals, which were the source of the published
                        articles.

                

                

                    
The articles – our key component
Dingler’s journal
                        comes in 360 volumes, each including 4 to 6 issues. The key components of
                        our edition are the 50 to 170 articles in each volume. Even at this very
                        basic level, we distinguish between two types of articles, since there are
                        in fact a couple of articles published for the first time in the
                        "Polytechnisches Journal" in addition to the reprinted articles.
                        We extract all these articles from the volume and provide access to
                        downloadable PDF-versions as well as different formats of established
                        bibliographical meta-data. In the long-run we aim at providing access to
                        PDFs generated dynamically via XSL-FO.

                

                

                    
Text and images
The editors of the journal strictly
                        adhered to the medial conditions of their time. In 1820 Dingler started
                        using Gothic typescript for text, and copper engravings for the imprints. In
                        later issues (starting in the 1870s) we find Antiqua letters and floating
                        images integrated within the text.

                    
Our aim is a re-interpretation of the relationship between text and images.
                        Dingler completed each volume with technical drawings and visualizations on
                        additional plates. Hence, up to 40 figures on a plate are encoded according
                        to their specific coordinates using the Image Markup Tool developed by the
                        University of Victoria. Via hyperlink we are able to provide access to a
                        zoomable view of each figure. This approach has two immediate advantages:
                        Firstly, it enables parallel reading of text and image and therefore adopts
                        the original layout, in which plates were attached to the back of each
                        volume as foldouts. Secondly, we can provide a new kind of readability. For
                        economic reasons the plates were densely packed with images. Highlighting
                        them per mouseover will be much more convenient, allowing to inspect them in
                        more detail and thus enabling a wider integration of the text and
                        images.

                    
Since right from the beginning Dingler insisted on very detailed and thus
                        expensive lithographs rather than wood engravings, we have made it our task
                        not to veer from the standard set by Dingler at this point.

                

            

            

                Dingler-Online II – The appearance
                
Not only since we are facing the challenging task of digitizing Gothic type in
                    more than 220 volumes of the "Polytechnisches Journal", we find
                    ourselves in good company with two rather impressive German digitization
                    projects: Grimms "Deutsches Wörterbuch" and Krünitz’s
                    "Oeconomische Encyclopädie". Both made use of double-keying and
                    therefore sent their books/images to Asia where the text digitization took
                    place. Afterwards so-called TUSTEP-routines were employed in order to match the
                    two different text versions.

                
In the following we will take a closer look at different aspects, which will take
                    our project one step further than the aforementioned approaches.

                

                    Goobi Digitization Suite
                    
With the so called Goobi Digitization Suite – a software solution funded by
                        the DFG and developed by the SLUB-Dresden (Sächsische Landesbibliothek –
                        Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek) and the SUB-Göttingen (Niedersächsische
                        Staats- und Universitäts- bibliothek) – we will be using a completely new
                        technology on the market.

                    
The Goobi Suite consists of two parts: 
Goobi.Production
 and 
Goobi.Presentation
.
                            
Goobi.Production
 is a web-based tool for managing
                        a digitization workflow using Java technology. Among other features, it
                        comes with a very flexible metadata editor, an user-based permission system,
                        and visually enhanced statistics.

                    
Since at the beginning of our project the Goobi Suite wasn’t available yet,
                        we found an experienced service provider for text digitization and
                        (semi-)automatic encoding: the Editura GmbH. Their OCR produces very good
                        results even for Gothic type, given that the images are scanned at 600
                        dpi.

                    
Editura encodes the OCRed text and already enriches it according to the
                        TEI-P5 guidelines. This step includes 'tagging' the structure and
                        special attributes of the text to an encoding level between 3 and 4. Thus
                        the digitization of the text includes more than a basic structural encoding
                        and we can concentrate on a more scientific encoding approach going beyond
                        other projects comparable in extent.

                    
Apart from XML-files in TEI-encoding and images encoded using the Image
                        Markup Tool our service provider delivers elaborate METS-files which are
                        necessary for a presentation of the edition in the so called DFG-viewer, as
                        well as in 
Goobi.Presentation
, which we use as part
                        two of the Goobi Digitization Suite. This is a full-featured web
                        presentation layer for digital material and is based on the TYPO3 CMS
                        Framework, which can hold a regular website, too. Hence, 
Goobi.Presentation
 integrates perfectly into any page inside the
                        CMS.

                    
The whole software suite is considered open source and freely available to
                        everyone. As can be seen in our project, 
Goobi.Presentation
 can be used independently from 
Goobi.Production
. This modularity of Goobi is ensured
                        by the consequent usage of the international standards METS, MODS and
                        TEI.

                

                

                    Customizing Goobi
                    
The more data there is to present, the less important any unstructured
                        information becomes. This is why encoding and a directed access to data, via
                        searching or browsing, becomes more and more important.

                    
Goobi.Presentation
 makes it possible to customize the
                        search engine. Naturally one will be able to search any term anywhere in the
                        text. In addition, it is possible to limit the search results referring to
                        different issues. For instance: if someone is looking for all articles on
                        patent applications on steam engines published in the magazine in the 1840s,
                        they will just have to search for "steam engine", then restrict
                        their search to "text type" patent application, and
                        "time" 1840s.

                

            

            

                Conclusion
                
Dingler-Online is an enriched digitization that is neither simply image-based nor
                    massproduced. It is a user-friendly platform which inspires a broad use not
                    restricted to historians of technology or, come to that, researchers, but is
                    open to the interested public in general.

            

        
        

                
Das Deutsche Wörterbuch von Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm auf
                            CD-ROM und im Internet
Dingler-Online | Das digitalisierte Polytech
-
nische
                            Journal
Editura GmbH
Fischer, F.
2007
Dinglers Polytechnisches Journal bis zum Tode seines
                            Begründers (1820-1855)
Archiv für Geschichte des Buchwesens
15
1027-1142
Goobi – DigitalLibraryModules
Oeconomische Encyclopädie online

        