
                    
The panel will present three projects which are exploring the use of metadata
                        to describe the narrative content of media. Computer-assisted textual
                        analysis is now a well known and important facet of scholarly investigation
                            (
Potter, 1991
; 
Burrows, 2004
; 
Yang, 2005
) however it relies heavily on statistical
                        approaches in which the computer uses character matching to identify
                        reoccurring strings. Although pattern recognition for image and audio search
                        is growing more sophisticated (
Downie,
                            2009
), the techniques for annotation of multimedia are subject to
                        the same limitations as those for text in that they cannot go beyond the
                        shape or the waveform into the meaning that those artifacts of expression
                        represent. 

                    
This limitation has been addressed in a number of different ways, for example
                        through traditional categorisation and with the use of keywords for theme
                        and motif annotation. New techniques using natural language processing
                        software such as GATE (
Auvil, 2007
),
                        and IBM's LanguageWare (1641 Depositions Project - 
http://www.tcd.ie/history/1641/
) have taken this further allowing
                        a deeper level of meaning to be inferred from the text through basic entity
                        and relationship recognition. The use of ontologies to support this
                        annotation opens the way for more precise search, retrieval and analysis
                        using the techniques developed in conjunction with semantic and linked web
                        architecture. 

                    
The three papers being presented in this panel will address the application
                        of these techniques to both textual and audio-visual media and consider
                        annotation not just of the documents themselves but of the ideas contained
                        within them, how this information might be presented to the user to best
                        effect. 

                    
The first paper in this panel by Dr Michael O. Jewell, Goldsmiths College,
                        University of London, focuses on the annotation of narrative in scripts and
                        screenplays. This paper presents the combination of TEI and RDF annotations
                        as a methodology for opening the encoded data up for inference-enhanced
                        exploration and augmentation through linked-data resources. 

                    
The second paper from Paul Rissen, BBC, and Dr K Faith Lawrence, Royal Irish
                        Academy, presents work being done at the BBC in the annotation of the
                        narratives within their audio/visual archives. This paper discusses the
                        initiatives within the BBC to make their content more accessible and to
                        allow more personal interaction with the material. Through the use of
                        ontology, the events contained the media object are exposed to exploration,
                        analysis and visualisation.

                    
 The final paper by Paolo Battino, Royal Irish Academy, continues the
                        visualisation theme to discuss how narrative annotations might be presented
                        to assist in analysis of texts. Using the example of folktales, this paper
                        considers the graphical representation of plotlines and the possible issues
                        and challenges inherent for visualisation in moving from syntactic to
                        semantic description. 

                

            
            

                    
Auvil, L.
Grois, E.
Lloràname, X.
, 
Pape, G.
Goren, V.
Sanders, B.
Acs, B.
McGrath, R. E.
2007
A Flexible System for Text Analysis with Semantic
                                Networks
Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2007
Burrows, J.
2004
Textual Analysis
A Companion to Digital Humanities
Schriebman, S.
Siemens, R.
Unsworth, J.
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford
Downie, J. S.
Byrd, D.
Crawford, T.
2009
Ten Years Of Ismir: Reflections On Challenges And
                                Opportunities
10th International Society for Music
                                Information Retrieval Conference
Potter, R. G.
1991
Statistical Analysis of Literature: A Retrospective on
                                Computers and the Humanities, 1966–1990
Computers and the Humanities
25.6
401-429
Yang, H-C.
Lee. H-C.
2005
Automatic Category Theme Identification and Hierarchy
                                Generation for Chinese Text Categorization
Journal of Intelligent Information Systems
25
1

            
Scripts, whether for radio plays, theatre, or ﬁlm, are a rich source of data. As
                    well as cast information and dialogue, they may include performance directions,
                    locations, camera motions, sound effects, captions, or entrances and exits. The
                    TEI Performance Texts module (
http://www.tei-c.org/P5
) provides a
                    means to encode this information into an existing screenplay, together with more
                    speciﬁc textual information such as metrical details.

                
Meanwhile, Linked Data has become a major component of the Semantic Web. This is
                    a set of best practices for publishing and connecting structured data on the
                    Web, which has led to the creation of a global data space containing billions of
                    assertions, known as the Web of Data (
Bizer et
                        al, 2009
). Some of the most prominent datasets in this space include
                    DBpedia, with more than 100 million assertions relating to (amongst others)
                    people, places, and ﬁlms; LMDB (Linked Movie Database), with over three million
                    ﬁlmic assertions; and LinkedGeoData, which has almost two billion geographical
                    assertions.

                
In this paper, we propose a means to support Linked Data in TEI, thus beneﬁtting
                    from the wealth of information available on top of that which is provided by
                    TEI. We describe the augmentation of TEI documents with RDFa (Resource
                    Description Format in Attributes) to complement the annotated content with URIs
                    and class information, and thence the transformation of this document into
                    triples using our open source tei2onto conversion tool. Finally, we provide some
                    case studies that make use of the resultant triples, and show how their
                    compliance with the OntoMedia ontologies (
Lawrence et al, 2006
) allows for powerful research possibilities. 

                

                    Annoting TEI
                    

                        Cast Lists
                        
The ﬁrst, and simplest, step to adding RDFa attributes to a TEI document
                            begins with the cast list. 
Listing
                                1
 shows a simple example of a castItem element for the role of
                            Jeffrey Beaumont in Blue Velvet, portrayed by Kyle MacLachlan. The about
                            attribute speciﬁes the object to which the element relates: the actor
                            element refers to the DBPedia entry for Kyle MacLachlan, while the role
                            refers to an object residing within the Blue Velvet namespace, created
                            speciﬁcally for this screenplay. The 
property

                            attribute deﬁnes the predicate that relates the content of the element
                            to the object - in this case, it is the name of the actor or character.
                            When processed by 
tei2onto
, actors are speciﬁed as
                                
Being
 objects, which are subclasses of the
                            Friend of a Friend (FOAF) ontology’s Agent class (
http://www.foaf-project.org/
), and roles as Character
                            objects. 

                        
The conversion script then analyses 
sp
 elements for
                            who attributes. These refer to the 
xml:id

                            attributes in the role elements, and thus it is possible to determine
                            the cast present in a scene and the entity speaking a line. The former
                            may be found via the involves predicates of the event, while the latter
                            is represented with the 
has-subject-entity

                            predicate. An OntoMedia Social event is created for each element, with
                            the 
precedes
 and 
follows

                            attributes describing the sequence of these events in the screenplay.
                                
Listing 2
 shows the N3
                            representation created from a single sp element. Listing 2: The N3
                            extracted from a TEI sp element given an annotated castList and valid
                            who attributes. The ome preﬁx refers to the OntoMedia Expression
                            namespace. 

                        

<castItem>
    <actor 
        about="[dbpedia:Kyle_MacLachlan]"
        property="foaf:name">Kyle MacLachlan</actor>
    <role 
        xml:id="jeffrey_beaumont" 
        about="[bv:Jeffrey_Beaumont]"
        property="foaf:name">Jeffrey Beaumont</role>
</castItem>
                        

                            Listing 1: A TEI 
castItem
 augmented with
                                RDFa. The 
dbpedia
, 
foaf

                                and 
bv
 preﬁxes refer to the DBpedia, FOAF, and
                                custom Blue Velvet namespaces.
                        

<http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/6>
a ome:Social; ome:follows
<http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/5>;
ome:has-subject-entity bv:Detective_Williams; ome:involves
bv:Detective_Williams, bv:Jeffrey_Beaumont; ome:precedes
<http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/7>; 

                            Listing 2: The N3 extracted from a TEI 
sp

                                element given an annotated 
castList
 and valid
                                who attributes. The 
ome
 preﬁx refers to the
                                OntoMedia Expression namespace.
                        

                    

                        Locations
                        
OntoMedia provides an extensive location ontology, and it is thus useful
                            to be able to specify this within a TEI document. 
tei2onto
 analyses the stage elements for this purpose,
                            specifically when the type attribute is given as `location'. The only
                            compulsory attribute is about which, as with the castList elements,
                            typically refers to an object in the screenplay's namespace. This allows
                            for references to the same location several times throughout a
                            screenplay, or even for other screenplays to reference it (e.g. the
                            Statue of Liberty, or Area 51). 

                        
By default, tei2onto defines locations as being instances of the Space
                            class. This is the highest level Location class, and equivalent to the
                            AKT Location Ontology Abstract-Space class. To specify a more relevant
                            class, the RDFa 
typeof
 attribute may be used.
                            Furthermore, by specifying a p sub-element it is possible to use the
                            textual name of the location as the dc:title of the object. 
Listing 3
 gives an example of
                            this, with 
Listing 4
 showing
                            the generated location N3 representation for the event from Listing 2
                            which is set in Room 221. 

                    

                

                

                    Expression References
                    
Finally, we augment the 
rs
 element with the RDFa about
                        attribute to provide a powerful means of object reference. OntoMedia defines
                        the 
refers-to
 property as a means to indicate that an
                        Expression object refers to another Expression object. For example, an event
                        may refer to a location, or a character, or even another event. By adding
                        this attribute to a TEI document many interesting queries may be performed.
                            
Listing 5
 illustrates a
                        (slightly abbreviated) set of examples of this, and Listing 6 contains the
                        full N3 result generated for the two 
sp
 elements.

                    

<stage type="location" about="[bv:Room_221]" typeof="[loc:Room]">
    <p property="dc:title">INT. ROOM 221 - POLICE STATION</p>
</stage>
                    

                        Listing 3: A TEI stage direction augmented with RDFa
                    

bv:Room_221 a loc:Room; 
 dc:title "INT. ROOM 221 – POLICE 
STATION"^^<rdf:XMLLiteral>.

<http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/6> a 
ome:Social;
 loc:is-located-in bv:Room_221. 

                        Listing 4: The N3 generated from Listing 3
                    

<sp who="#jeffrey_beaumont">
    <speaker>JEFFREY</speaker>
    <l>Is <rs type="person" about="[bv:Detective_Williams]">Detective
            Williams</rs> here?</l>
</sp>
<sp who="#desk_sergeant">
    <speaker>DESK SERGEANT</speaker>
    <l>He's up in <rs type="place" about="[bv:Room_221]">Room 221</rs>.</l>
</sp>
                   

                        Listing 5: Augmenting the rs element to provide location and character
                            references
                    

<http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/1> a ome:Social;
    ome:has-subject-entity bv:Jeffrey_Beaumont;
    ome:involves bv:Desk_Sergeant, bv:Jeffrey_Beaumont;
    ome:precedes
<http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/2>;
    ome:refers-to bv:Detective_Williams;
    loc:is-located-in bv:Police_Department_Reception.
        
<http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/2> a ome:Social;
    ome:follows <http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/1>;
    ome:has-subject-entity bv:Desk_Sergeant;
    ome:involves bv:Desk_Sergeant, bv:Jeffrey_Beaumont;
    ome:precedes   
<http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/event/3>;
    ome:refers-to bv:Room_221;
    loc:is-located-in bv:Police_Department_Reception.


                        Listing 6: The N3 generated from Listing 5
                    

PREFIX bv: <http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/> 
PREFIX ome: <http://purl.org/ontomedia/core/expression#> 

SELECT DISTINCT ?event WHERE
{
 ?event ome:refers-to bv:Detective_Williams.
}
                    

                        Listing 7: SPARQL to retrieve every scene referring to Detective
                            Williams.
                    
As some of the objects in the screenplay refer to external entities, it is
                        also possible to make use of Linked Data. For example, DBpedia has a great
                        deal of information regarding Kyle MacLachlan, who we have specified as the
                        actor playing Jeffrey Beaumont. 
Listing
                            8
 gives an example of one of these more powerful queries. In this
                        query, every actor starring in Blue Velvet is retrieved and then every other
                        film that they have starred in is retrieved from DBpedia. The directors of
                        these films are then obtained as URIs. Other queries could, for example,
                        find the most common nationality among cast members, or find actors who have
                        been in other films by the same director. Furthermore, the OntoMedia
                        structure could be leveraged to find films in which the same actors have
                        played alongside each other. For series, the character URIs could also be
                        incorporated - for example, to find every episode in which a character has
                        had a scene set in a factory. 

                

                

                    Conclusion
                    
The 
tei2onto
 TEI translation tool provides a quick and
                        non-intrusive approach to make use of the Web of Data's Linked Data. Even
                        with the simple addition of about attributes on the cast list, hundreds of
                        assertions about the actors are immediately available. Once location
                        references are provided, it is possible to analyse location usage through TV
                        series, or link them to their real-life counterparts to examine setting
                        information. Finally, the rs element allows for interlinking within events:
                        be it to find where characters and locations are introduced, to investigate
                        which characters are the most talked about, or even to find references to
                        characters in an entirely different film. 

                    

PREFIX bv: <http://contextus.net/resource/blue_velvet/>
PREFIX dbpedia: <http://dbpedia.org/ontology/>
PREFIX omb: <http://purl.org/ontomedia/ext/common/being#>

SELECT DISTINCT ?director WHERE
{
 ?character omb:portrayed-by ?actor.
 ?film dbpedia:starring ?actor;
 dbpedia:director ?director.
}
                        

                        Listing 8: SPARQL to ﬁnd people who have directed the Blue Velvet
                            actors in other films.
                    
Future revisions of 
tei2onto
 will include support for
                        TEI person, place, and trait data; an approach to represent references to
                        the original TEI document via XPath; and more specific camera and movement
                        description. Finally, we will be providing annotated TEI and the
                        accompanying N3 and RDF at the Contextus Data Store website (
http://contextus.net/¬datastores
), which we hope will provide an
                        entry point into the Semantic Web for narrative researchers.

                

            
            

                    
Bizer, C.
Heath, T.
Berners-Lee, T.
2009
Linked Data - The Story So Far
International Journal on Semantic Web and Information
                                Systems (IJSWIS)
Harris, S.
Lamb, N.
Shadbolt, S.
2009
4store: The Design and Implementation of a Clustered
                                RDF Store
The 5th International Workshop on
                                Scalable Semantic Web Knowledge Base Systems
Lawrence, K. F.
Jewell, M. O.
Schraefel, M. C.
Prugel-Bennett, A.
2006
Annotation of Heterogenous Media Using
                                OntoMedia
First International Workshop on
                                Semantic Web Annotations for Multimedia (SWAMM)

            
This paper will introduce the work being done at and in conjunction with the BBC
                    into using descriptive metadata to improve production and distribution of
                    content but in such a way that it is positioned within the greater cultural
                    context. With the increased digitisation and release of resources there is also
                    an increased need for associated information that can be computer processed and
                    analysed to adequately index and search the rapidly expanding pool of data. The
                    use of standard metadata formats for description and storage is now part of good
                    practice but is still limited in its scope and application. In this paper we
                    will discuss the ongoing research into semantic description of media content to
                    supplement and expand on current metadata practice to allow more detailed
                    analysis and visualisation of digitised documents and the conceptual links
                    between them.

                

                    New Media, New Opportunities
                    
For the past twenty years, the World Wide Web has been used by media
                        companies as an enabling technology, allowing them to do the same things as
                        they have always done, but faster and cheaper, whilst making their content
                        more widely available, and for longer periods of time. In addition, the Web
                        has been used as a promotional and marketing tool, increasing the public
                        awareness of content, and providing direct consumption opportunities. In the
                        UK, this can most obviously be seen through the successes of the BBC’s
                        iPlayer (
http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/
), and Channel 4’s 4 On Demand (
http://www.channel4.com/¬programmes/4od
) services. However,
                        despite these successes, it can be argued that the tendency is for media
                        companies not to have taken full advantage of the creative opportunities
                        offered by web technologies due to concerns regarding control of content,
                        licensing issues, technical limitations and the need to ensure a revenue
                        stream.

                    
There has been much discussion and research within and around the industry on
                        the topic of interactivity analysing of how the web could be used to offer
                        new, more immersive and satisfying experiences to the audiences. The EU’s
                        NM2 ‘New Millennium, New Media’ project (
http://www.ist-nm2.org/publications/deliverables/deliverables.html
)
                        commissioned a number of studies on audience appreciation of media output in
                        addition to paving the way for various experiments into the use of
                        traditional IT-based production tools to enhance existing content offerings
                            (
Ursu, 2008
). However, we argue
                        that this work has been heavily based in the traditional understanding of
                        media production and as such uses graphical technologies, such as Flash,
                        whereby the audience is still reduced to a primarily passive role in the
                        consumption of media content. This leads to a mis-use of the term
                        ‘interactive’ to indicate not a more personalised experience but one which
                        is being delivered through a different medium. 

                

                

                    Interactivity and the Semantic Document
                    
The hype surrounding the term ‘Semantic Web’ (
Berners-Lee et al., 2001
) in recent years has led
                        some to doubt its existence and the opportunities it claims to offer.
                        Although commonly acknowledged to be a complex subject, at its heart, the
                        idea of the semantic web, and of the web itself, is simple. Concepts which
                        are of interest, be they people, places, events or cultural movements, are
                        given unique, permanent identifiers, and links, crucially links with
                        meaning, are drawn between them. In this, its roots can be seen very much in
                        the original design of the Web as put forward by Sir Tim Berners-Lee. 

                    
The ideas inherent in the Semantic Web reflect the experience of our own
                        understanding of the world, where, it could be argued, it is the context,
                        i.e. the links we make in our minds, rather than individual objects
                        themselves, which are of the most value. The Semantic Web seeks to replicate
                        this in digital form, and improve upon it, by making these links solid,
                        permanent, and recorded.

                    
At the BBC, three recent projects - BBC/programmes, BBC/music and
                        BBC/wildlifefinder - have sought to apply these principles to parts of our
                        output. These projects sought to increase the value for the content for the
                        user-audience by allowing them to create their own journeys across the
                        resources made available to them on the BBC website and at the same time
                        drawing increased understanding and insight from the knowledge presented on
                        those pages and from selected external sources across the web. 

                    
The work to date has concentrated on the structures of production and
                        distribution of BBC content. However, we argue that the real audience value
                        and appreciation can be gained by applying the same approach to the content
                        itself and annotating not only the video/audio files we create, but, more
                        importantly, the narrative structures contained within them. Research into
                        audience and fan studies (for instance 
Jenkins, 1992
; 
Harris et
                            al., 1998
; 
Baym, 2000
;
                            
Hills, 2002
; 
Jenkins, 2006
) suggests that the
                        audience is creating and expanding a narrative structure within their minds
                        while they are watching media content. While, in reference to this research,
                        this factor was seen as applicable to the content produced by the BBC, its
                        wider relevance should be noted.

                    
Building on this initial work, our research uses a RDF-based triplestore and
                        the Ontomedia ontology to recreate, using semantic web technologies, the
                        users experience of narrative within media. The OntoMedia ontology was
                        designed at the University of Southampton to enable expression of narrative
                        structures within and between mono- and multimedia documents (
Lawrence, 2007, Part IV
). 

                

                

                    The Semantic Viewer
                    
In the context of the BBC’s drama output, or by corollary any similar corpus
                        of work, we chose to apply the methodology described above as part of a
                        pilot project. By giving each character, location and significant plot event
                        an identifier, and creating meaningful links between them, in parallel with
                        those found in the media itself, we argue that we can allow audiences to
                        follow their own path through the narrative, to explore stories from
                        different points of view, and to achieve a greater appreciation, and true
                        interaction with, the writers’ craft. In the diagram shown below (
Fig. 1
), the events of the Doctor Who
                        episode Blink (Steven Moffat, 2007) are linked not only the narrative order
                        in which they were experienced within the broadcast but also within the
                        chronological order within the fictional universe containing them and to the
                        orders in which specific characters perceived them. This information, once
                        described with the OntoMedia ontology, is stored within the repository as
                        triples where it can be queried, analysed and visualised. 
Fig. 1: Timelines For Doctor Who Episode Blink 
                            

                    
The potential of this approach can also be seen in greater terms when applied
                        to other areas of a media company such as the BBC’s traditional output.
                        Documentaries are often forms of narrative that seek to draw meaningful
                        links between diverse concepts, in order to educate and inform audiences.
                        These same audiences find enjoyment in our coverage of sport precisely
                        because they are able to place what we report in a wider, linked context.
                        Even news coverage, when seen through this lens, could be transformed,
                        allowing audiences to construct a better understanding of the world we live
                        in, by seeing things from multiple points of view, and constructing their
                        own, informed opinions on events.

                

                

                    Conclusion
                    
While the research we discuss in this paper deals with the annotation of
                        narrative within audio/visual media the techniques discussed have a much
                        wider ranging applications. The ontology in use was designed to deal with
                        multiple types of sources and in conjunction with other metadata standards
                        such as CIDOC CRM (
http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/
), FRBR (
http://www.frbr.org/
) and TEI (
http://www.tei-c.org/
). This allows
                        for the conceptual links between many different types of documents to be
                        made explicit in such a way that a computer could analyse, process and
                        visualise them. While a consumer of BBC content might wish to interrogate
                        the narrative from different perspectives, so might a literary scholar or a
                        historian wish to explore their sources were these techniques applied to
                        heritage materials. 

                

            
            

                    
Baym, N.
2000
Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom and Online
                                Community
Sage Publications
California
Berners-Lee, T.
Hendler, J.
Lassila, O.
2001
The Semantic Web
Scientific American Magazine
Harris, C.
Alexander, A.
1998
Theorizing Fandom: Fans, Subculture and
                                Identity
Hampton Press, Inc
New Jersey
Hills, M.
2002
Fan Cultures
Routledge
London
Jenkins, H.
1992
Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory
                                Culture
Routledge
London
Jenkins, H.
2006
Fans, Bloggers, and Gamers: Exploring Participatory
                                Culture
New York University Press
New York
Lawrence, K. F.
, 
2007
The Web of Community Trust - Amateur Fiction Online: A
                                Case Study in Community Focused Design for the Semantic Web
,
                            Doctoral Thesis, 
University of Southampton
Ursu, M. F.
Thomas, M.
Kegel, I.
Williams, D.
Tuomola, M.
Lindstedt, I.
Wright, T.
Leurdijk, A.
, 
Zsombori, V.
Sussner, J.
Myrestam, U.
Hall, N.
2008
Interactive TV Narratives: Opportunities, Progress, and
                                Challenges
ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput. Commun. Appl.
4, 4, Oct

            
Storing text in a digital format opened up a whole range of new possibilities of
                    unconventional visualization techniques, including displaying texts in forms
                    other than textual. Similarly to what happens with pie charts and histograms in
                    representing large amounts of numeric data, word clouds and visual taxonomies
                    allow grasping at a glance some interesting relationships among text’s
                    constituents. The power of these graphic representations of e-texts is often
                    based on the possibility of counting occurrences of each word, clustering words,
                    identifying recurring patterns of words. 

                
However, as we move from syntax to semantic, we may run into some serious
                    limitations. Comparatively, there is a limited number of text visualisation
                    tools based on semantics of words. Few tools, if any, exist to account for
                    deeper semantic structures underlying texts. Finding a tool that can rightly
                    account for two sentences with same meaning but different syntax can be hard,
                    not to mention accounting for the narrative structure of plot or the roles of
                    characters. 

                

                    Narrative structures and markup languages
                    
An interesting attempt to account for these structures in e-texts is Proppian
                        Fairy Tale Markup Language (PftML) developed by Scott A. Malec. Based on
                        Vladimir Propp's 
Morphology of the Folktale

                        (1928), 
PftML utilizes a Document Type Definition (DTD) to
                            create a formal model of the structure of Russian magic tale narrative
                            and to help standardize the tags throughout the corpus
. According
                        to this approach, a text can be tagged as to encode Propp's
                        "functions," or the 31 fundamental units that the Russian
                        folklorist identified as the recurring building blocks of a Russian magic
                        tale plot. Malec provides an example translated in English, The Swan-Geese
                        tale. The related XML file is shown hereafter (see 
Listing 1
), collapsed to 4 levels of depth (with
                        the exception of the <Preparation> tag, which is fully expanded). 

                    
Software could easily parse this XML file, and quickly and reliably help the
                        scholar in verifying some of Propp’s theories, for example:
Acquisition of Magical Agent
 appears three
                                times, none of which directly lead to Victory, 
Departure
 is subsequent to 
Villainy
,
Pursuit Rescue Of Hero
 is composed by three
                                series of 
Pursuit Of Hero
 + 
Rescue Of Hero
 (
collapsed under
<PursuitRescueOfHero>
in the above picture
)
Listing 1: Example of XML Describing The Swan-Geese (Full Version:
                                    
http://clover.slavic.pitt.edu/¬sam/propp/have_a_little_byte/magicgeese.xml
)
                            

                

                

                    Graphic visualization of narrative structures
                    
Taking Malec’s work as a starting point, we produced a graphic representation
                        of the XML file, aimed at highlighting some aspects of the narrative
                        structure of the tale (see 
Fig. 1
) 

                    
Fig. 1: Diagram Highlighting the Aspects of the Narrative
                            Structure
                        
The diagram above is meant to highlight the following aspects: 
Function nesting (e.g.: 
Preparation
 includes
                                    
Initial Situation
 + 
Command
                                    Execution
)
Sequencing of “cornerstone” functions (
Villainy
 -> 
Departure
 -> 
Liquidation of Lack
 -> 
Return
). 
Cyclical repetition of same functions (in this case 
Donor Function
 + 
Acquisition of
                                    Magical Agent
, and 
Pursuit of
                                Hero
).
In case of repetition, some functions are of same subtypes (in
                                this case the three instances of 
Pursuit of
                                    Hero
 are of same subtype, while 
Rescue of
                                    Hero
 instances are of two sub types, forming a A-B-A
                                sequence).

                

                

                    The challenge
                    
When we move from the analysis of words to the analysis of narrative
                        structures we are facing a shift in the unit of analysis: we are no more
                        limited to the elements of expression plane (i.e. words, in case of a text).
                        We are now interested in “functions”, as named by Propp, or “events”, or
                        “roles”. In other words, we are interested in analysing the meaning of
                        sentences, or even entire paragraphs and chapters. In some cases the actual
                        words used to express the meaning can be almost irrelevant for us, and we
                        would like to “see through” the endless possible variations of expressing
                        the same concept. 

                    
In a folktale, if we are looking for that topic event generally called 
Villainy
, regardless of whether carried out by villain
                        or villain helper, which words should we look for? And if we are looking for
                            
Liquidation of Lack
, represented in Sleeping Beauty
                        by the re-acquisition of consciousness, can we consider these three
                        sentences equivalent? 
 The Prince kissed the Princess, and the
                                    Princess awoke.
The Princess awoke when kissed by the
                                    Prince.
The kiss given by the Prince awoke the
                                    Princess.

                    
We may say that these three sentences have different 
phrase
                            syntax
 but same 
actantial syntax
, as
                        synthesized by Marsciani & Zinna (1991, pg. 56). That is, they express
                        the same event (the Princess goes from asleep to conscious), with the
                        characters having the same role (the Prince triggers the event), even if the
                        words “Prince”, “Princess”, “kiss”, etc. appear to have different
                        grammatical roles in each sentence. The word 
actantial
                            syntax
 refers to Tesnière’s theory of 
valency
                            grammar
, where the verb is considered central to the sentence, like
                        an atom that attracts a number of “participant roles”, the 
actants
 (Tesnière, 1959, p. 102). Tesnière explicitly attempts to
                        analyse syntax and semantics separately (Tesnière, 1966 [1959], ch. 97 §3),
                        and his work inspired the 
actantial model

                        subsequently developed by A. J. Greimas (Marsciani & Zinna, 1991, pg.
                        54-57).

                    
Using the notation proposed by Greimas, we could express the
                        aforementioned

                    
“the Princess goes from asleep to conscious” + “the Prince trigger the
                        event”

                    
by

                    

                        
 [S1 -> (S2 
∩
 O1)] 
 where
S1 = Subject 1, “the Prince”
S2 = Subject 2,
                                    “the Princess”
O1= Object of Value 1,
                                        “consciousness”
∩
 = Union
-> =
                                    Action 
This is an over-simplification of Greimas’ actantial model. However, it is
                        worth noting that Greimas’ model is meant to formalise not only the
                        semantics of a sentence, but also the narrative structure of the whole text.
                        On the one hand, Greimas’ model is heavily based on Propp theory (Schleifer
                        1987, pg. 121-126), on the other it goes far beyond the actantial model and
                        seeks to analyse the path of meaning as it goes, in a given text, from
                        deeper structures to surfacing structures, also known as 
Generative Trajectory of Discourse
 (Greimas & Courtés, 1979,
                        pg. 157).

                

                

                    The model: the Generative Trajectory
                    
In an attempt to formalise and graphically represent the narrative structure
                        of e text, the Generative Trajectory proved to be a valuable starting point.
                        This model is well suited for our purpose because: 
It is well-rooted into narratology.
 It seeks for a “
fundamental semantics and
                                    grammar
” of narrativity, focusing on the relationships
                                between expression plane and content plane (meaning), as well as on
                                different pertinence levels.
 It already offers some formalism to express and analyse meaning,
                                inspired by structural linguistics.
It is based on 40 years of semiotic studies and has already proved
                                to be very effective in analysing an impressive variety of
                                texts.

                    
Encoding some elements of this semiotic model into e-texts in the form of
                        tags allowed us to produce a prototype graphic representation of some
                        narrative phenomena.

                    
The elements of Greimas’ theory that we took into account are: 
Multi-level analysis
: signification is
                                articulated in three different pertinence levels, from deep
                                structures to surface structures (Marsciani & Zinna, 1991, pg.
                                132-133): 
SEMIO-NARRATIVE STRUCTURES
: tags marking
                                            
axiologies
 and 
modalization
, as such describing how deep values
                                        are positioned on the 
semiotic
                                        square
, how these values orientate the 
Narrative Programs
, how the 
actants
 take position within the
                                        Narrative Programs.
DISCOURSIVE STRUCTURES
: tags marking 
thematization
 and 
figurativisation
, as such describing the actors,
                                        places and times that constitute the discourse.
TEXTUAL STRUCTURES
: the text itself.
Conversion across levels
: Tags at different
                                levels are interrelated, and these relationships constitute the
                                tangible aspect of the “conversion process” across levels, that is
                                the Generative Trajectory going from more abstract (deeper) levels
                                to more concrete (surface) levels, up to the manifest level: the
                                text itself. 
Narrative Programs Nesting
: Besides the Basic
                                Narrative Program, the one that subsume the whole text, other
                                sub-Programs are taken into account (Array of Narrative Programs,
                                (Hebert, 2006)).
Actantial Model
.
Semiotic Square
: used to describe
                                articulation and axiology of deep values across levels.

                

                

                    Conclusion
                    
In order to give a visual representation to narrative structures of text, we
                        need to formalise the semantic and syntax of these structures. To that end,
                        we relied on the A. J. Greimas’ Generative Trajectory theory. Implementing
                        some aspects of this theory in an experimental mark-up language allowed us
                        to generate graphic visualization of the underlying deep semantic structures
                        of texts. Some other aspects of Generative Trajectory could be then
                        implemented, for example the 
Canonical Narrative
                        Schema
, especially relevant for the analysis of folktales corpora.

                

            
            

                    
Greimas, A. J.
1979
Courtés
Sémiotique, Dictionnaire raisonné de la théorie du
                                language
Hachette
Paris
Tesnière, L.
1959
Éléments de syntaxe structurale
Klincksieck
Paris
2nd ed. 1966
Schleifer, R.
1987
A. J. Greimas and the Nature of Meaning
Croom Helm
London
Propp, V. Y.
1928
Morfologija skazki
.
                                
Academia
Leningrad
English translation: 
Morphology of the
                                    Folktale
, The Hague: Mouton, 1958; Austin: University of
                                Texas Press, 1968
.
Marsciani, F.
Zinna, A.
1991
Elementi di Semiotica Generativa
Esculapio
Bologna
Hébert, L.
2006
The Actantial Model
Louis Hébert (dir.)
Signo
15 November 2009

            