
                
In this poster/demo, we will describe and analyze the experience of teaching
                    English 486, “Producing the City.” An experimental course co-taught between Dr
                    Heather Zwicker, Associate Professor of English, and Dr Maureen Engel,
                    E-Learning Manager for the Faculty of Arts at the University of Alberta, English
                    486 is a hands-on, theoretically grounded capstone course in multimedia
                    installations that takes the city of Edmonton, Canada as inspiration and object.
                    Based on principles of collaboration and student-centered learning, the course
                    takes the city as its primary text. Grounded in short Edmonton narratives and a
                    range of urban theory, the course listened to the city, looked at the city,
                    moved through the city, and explored the meanings of home. The sensory
                    experiences of sound, sight, and movement were translated through student
                    projects using digital photography, simple mapping, soundscapes, and video. Each
                    of these assignments served as a scaffolding exercise to prepare students for
                    the final collaborative project: a KML-authored installation designed for Google
                    Earth.

                
This course did not take GIS as its object of study; rather, it took the city as
                    its object and asked students to use various multimedia tools to express their
                    critical and creative engagement with that city and its narratives. Various
                    assignments asked the students to demonstrate and explore their learning through
                    digital tools, not to engage with and analyse the potential of the tools
                    themselves. We asked them to learn new ways of expressing their ideas, and to
                    discover the affordances of digital technologies to their critical apparatus.
                    The course raised multiple questions about discipline, pedagogy, theory, and
                    technology. Our presentation offers a critical commentary on our successes and
                    shortcomings, and demonstrates the importance - and surprising payoffs - of
                    doing this sort of work with undergraduate students in the traditionally
                    low-tech field of English literature.

                
Our poster presentation / demo will have three components. The first is an
                    overview of the course, describing its intellectual aims and technical models.
                    We explore some concepts that are often taken for granted: what is a map, how
                    does it organize information, how does the concept of "space" translate into
                    "place"? We overview digitally mapped urban literature in sites like Imagining
                    Toronto, City of Memory (New York), Hitotoki (Tokyo, Shanghai, Paris, Sofia),
                    Concrete Dialogues (Perth Australia), and Artangel (London), as well as acoustic
                    ecology sites like the London Sound Survey, the Montreal and New York Sound
                    Maps, as well as the Open Street Map project. Sites like these open up both the
                    concept of mapping and the conventions of narrative in interesting ways, playing
                    with the synchronicity of the traditional map and the linearity of conventional
                    narrative. And yet for reasons to do with Edmonton's scarce representations and
                    relative youth, such models could not be translated wholesale into our
                    course.

                
The second section of our poster presentation turns to the pedagogical
                    implications of team-teaching digital media under the aegis of the English
                    Department. Working with digital media requires both instructors and students to
                    shift their expectations. Whereas the pedagogy we're familiar with frequently
                    measures student learning by verbal articulation, whether oral or written, we
                    instructors had to learn to put "discovery learning" to work in classrooms by
                    letting students explore on their own, to a certain extent. The biggest
                    challenge for the students in English 486 was not the technology per se, but
                    rather the nature of the assignments. Instead of sole-authored papers, for
                    instance, students had to learn to work collaboratively on sustained projects
                    over the course of the semester. The course also demanded unfamiliar ways of
                    reading and writing, in addition to mastering the specific digital tools.
                    Students had to figure out which rhetorical techniques are transferable and
                    adaptable to the digital realm, and which are not. They had to exercise critical
                    skills on the visual culture ubiquitous to their personal, if not their
                    academic, experience. Our presentation pays particular attention to the ways in
                    which the students surprised and surpassed our expectations, and the key lessons
                    both they and we learned from the shift in genre from the research essay to the
                    digital story/argument. Key to this aspect of our presentation will be demos of
                    actual student projects.

                
Part three will offer a critical analysis of the digital tools we used for
                    representing Edmonton. In particular, we evaluate Google Maps and Google Earth
                    as a technical platform for this kind of pedagogical work. Publicly available
                    and free of charge, Google Maps and Google Earth have much to recommend them;
                    they present a low barrier to entry, both financially and technologically. At
                    the level of politics, relying on Google for fundamental courseware is
                    problematic – asking our students to expose their work to a massive commercial
                    enterprise based in a foreign country was a difficult decision to make. At the
                    level of pedagogy, any digital application will present students with specific
                    narrative constraints – Google Earth can only 
do
 what
                    Google Earth can do, and would that be sufficient for the task we set for our
                    students? We will assess the extent to which these tools are enabling or
                    limiting, particularly to students crossing genres from traditional academic
                    prose. The hypercities tool (
www.hypercities.com
) was evolving in
                    beta as the course progressed, and though it ultimately would have served our
                    pedagogical goals more satisfyingly, reliability and practicality carried the
                    day. That Google’s ubiquity and stability were significant determinants in our
                    pedagogical practice is instructive, if disheartening.

                
Looking back, the course demanded much of both its instructors and its students.
                    The quality of the work the students produced, however, and the extent of their
                    learning proved that using digital tools pushed students to go farther than
                    conventional tools could have.

            

        
        

                
Abrams, Janet
Hall, Peter
2005
Else/Where: Mapping New Cartographies of Networks and
                            Territories
University of Minnesota Press
Minneapolis
Artangel
Benjamin, Walter
1978
A Berlin Chronicle
Reflections: Essays, Aphorisms, Autobiographical
                            Writings
Demetz, Peter
Jephcatt, Edmund
Schocken Books
New York
3-58
Best of Open Street Map
Debord, Guy
1981
Theory of the Derive
de Certeau, Michel
1984
Walking in the City
The Practice of Everyday Life
University of California Press
Berkeley, CA
91-110
City of Edmonton
2004
Naming Edmonton from Ada to Zoie
University of Alberta Press 
Edmonton
City of Edmonton maps
City of Memory
Concrete Dialogues
Edmonton Geological Society
1993
Edmonton Beneath our Feet: A Guide to the Geology of the
                            Edmonton Region
Edmonton Geological Society
Edmonton
Edmonton Police Service crime map
Edmonton Stories
Goyette, Linda
2004
Edmonton in Our Own Words
University of Alberta Press 
Edmonton
Gregory, Ian
Ell, Paul
2006
Historical GIS: Technologies, Methodologies and
                            Scholarship
Cambridge University Press
Cambridge
Harmon, Katherine
2003
You Are Here: Personal Geographies and Other Maps of the
                            Imagination
Princeton Architectural Press
Princeton
Healthy City
Hitotoki
Horton, Marc
Sass, Bill
2003
Voice of a City: The Edmonton Journal’s First Century 1903
                            to 2003 
Collum, Peter
Edmonton Journal Group
Edmonton
Hillier, Amy
Knowles, Anne Kelly
2008
Placing History: How Maps, Spatial Data and GIS are
                            Changing Historical Scholarship
ESRI Press
Redlands, CA
CD-ROM
Hypercities
Imagining Toronto
Knowles, Anne Kelly
2002
Past Time, Past Place: GIS for History
ESRI Press
Redlands, CA
Lippard, Lucy
1997
Sweet Home and Being in Place
The Lure of the Local: Senses of Place in a Multicentered
                            Society
New Press
New York
22-38
London Sound Survey
Montreal Sound Map
Moretti, Franco
2005
Graphs Maps Trees: Abstract Models for Literary
                            History
Verso
New York
New York Sound Map
Open Street Map project
San Francisco biomapping project
Sindon, Diana Stuart
2007
Understanding Place: GIS and Mapping Across the
                            Curriculum
ESRI Press
Redlands, CA
Solnit, Rebecca
2001
The Solitary Stroller and the City
Wanderlust: A History of Walking
Penguin
New York
171-195
Thompson, Nato
Independent Curators International
2008
Experimental Geography: Radical Approachs to Landscape,
                            Cartography, and Urbanism
Melville House
New York
Turchi, Peter
2007
Maps of the Imagination: The Writer as Cartographer
Trinity University Press
San Antonio, TX
Urban Sketchers
VozMob
Walk Score

        