The 
École nationale des chartes
 publishes a variety of
                electronic corpora,
http://elec.enc.sorbonne.fr/
 focused on historical sources
                (medieval, but also, modern and contemporary). A dictionary,
http://ducange.enc.sorbonne.fr/
 a collection of
                        acts,
http://elec.enc.sorbonne.fr/cartulaires/
 or a
                        manuscript
http://elec.enc.sorbonne.fr/sanctoral/
 are very different
                types of documents, each requiring different structures and interfaces. A narrative
                manuscript needs a table of contents, a dictionary, fast access to headwords, and
                acts, the ability to sort by dates. Each editorial project should allow
                customization, but efficient development requires that the tools and corpora are as
                normalized as possible. New needs emerge, such as natural language processing
                research, requiring large corpora with normalized metadata sets and word tagging.
                For several months we have been working on a platform to address these needs: 
Diple
 is a collection of tools to organize modular
                production, publication, and searching of electronic corpora.

            

                Modular schemas
                
The TEI guidelines (500 XML elements, 1500 pages of documentation) allow endless
                    variations in encoding, even for identical objects. For example, 
italic
 in our corpora has been encoded with different
                    combinations of <(hi|emph)
                    rend="(italique|italic|ital.|i|itlaic|...)">. After several years
                    of development, with different encoders, each electronic edition becomes an
                    independent software, with its own encoding, mistakes, workarounds, with also
                    different technologies for publication or fulltext searching.

                
Diple
 starts with housekeeping. First, for all our tagged
                    texts, we wrote a precise 
document type definition
 (in
                    Relax-NG syntax) in order to define three main and shared schemas : 
file metadatas (<teiHeader>)
general text (blocks and inlines)
structure for a specific type of text (ex: acts and charters,
                            dictionaries)

                
The normalization of the corpora is a more sustainable investment than new
                    software. These shared schemas are extremely helpful for normalizing and
                    validating XML instances, and therefore allow us to take advantage of earlier
                    TEI editions. Of course, the 
Diple
 TEI schema is modular,
                    allowing customization for each editorial project.
For example, 
http://elec.enc.sorbonne.fr/cartulairesIdF/src/schema.htm

                    An editor can then focus on the specificities of each edition. Are named
                    entities sufficiently tagged to generate automatic indexes? Are the sentences
                    chunked, the words lemmatized?

                
Moreover, this work of normalization of our XML corpora is a small price to pay
                    to factorize our code, for instance to create a standard XSLT engine: the screen
                    transformation of a new corpus conforming to those schemas is done by this
                    engine, increasing our publication productivity. In the end, the XSLT of a
                    specific edition is short, focusing on the very specific aspects of the corpus
                    (its custom schema) related to a research project, the main part of the
                    publication job being done by the 
Diple
 XSLT engine. The
                    same logic applied for presentation CSS.

            

            

                Shared interface components, documents driven
                
A publication system usually allows templating and plugins. A good software
                    architecture should be conceived in this way, but scholarly editions don't
                    function like a CMS. Templating systems are usually designed to effect easy
                    change of colours, to deliver the same feature under different designs. In a
                    scholarly collection, books could share a cover, but follow very different
                    structures. Rather than constrain all corpora to a single template, the 
Diple
 system provides different components, allowing an
                    electronic corpus editor to compose the interface best suited to his text.
                    Headers or footers are easy to share, but beyond that, one project might require
                    a fulltext search box, another a database query, another a sidebar table of
                    contents. Design snippets or plugins are conceived of as portal bricks, easy to
                    compose in a server page (PHP), and are kept as simple and light as possible. If
                    a local variable, function or object could have a general interest, it should be
                    shared.

            

            

                Text engines for research, retrieving and concordances
                
Navigation, tables and indexes, should answer most of the user's needs; but a
                    search box is also an important navigation tool. 
Diple

                    ensures a canonical electronic publication, with persistent addresses, so that
                    different text engines can be plugged around the edition. Corpora may require
                    different approaches. A collection of items, like a dictionary or cartularies,
                    needs at first a retrieving engine to get an item conveniently, by a keyword in
                    full-text, but also dates, headwords and other metadatas. There are also texts
                    for which no divisions are relevant; a concordance report is much more
                    informative, displaying all occurrences in context. Different tools offer
                    different views, documented XML allows us to generate what an engine likes. We
                    have successfully used MySQL full-text indexes
http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/fulltext-search.html

                    for navigation interfaces, PhiloLogic
http://philologic.uchicago.edu/
 for concordances,
                            Lucene
http://lucene.apache.org/java/
 is very efficient to
                    retrieve items, and we learned to use IMS Corpus Workbench (CWB)
http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/CorpusWorkbench/
 for
                    future lemmatized corpora. But sometimes we also simply use mixed scripts
                    (shell, XSLT, SAX…) to run a specific experiment on a word or a semantic
                    field.

            

            

                Conclusion
                
Diple
 grows and adapts with each new corpus, rapidly
                    incorporating other corpora, an idea worth generalizing. All our code will soon
                    be released under a free software license. Anyone can download, read, and try
                        
Diple
. We don’t claim it will work for all your TEI
                    documents, but if they conform to the schemas, you will quickly get nice results
                    on the screen.

            

        
        

                
Bourgain, Pascale
Vieillard, Françoise (coord.)
Conseils pour l'édition des textes médiévaux
Fascicule III. Textes littéraires
Éd. du CTHS, École des chartes
Paris
2002
Guyotjeannin, Olivier
Vieillard, Françoise (coord.)
Conseils pour l'édition des textes médiévaux
Fascicule I
Conseils généraux
Éd. du CTHS, École des chartes
Paris
2001
Olivier Guyotjeannin (coord.)
Conseils pour l'édition des textes médiévaux
Fascicule II
Actes et documents d'archives
Éd. du CTHS, École des chartes
Paris
2001
McCandless, Michael
Hatcher, Erik
Gospodnetić, Otis
Lucene in action
Manning Publications Co.
2010
2e
                        ed.
TEI Consortium
TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                            Interchange
Wooldridge, Russon
Les Débuts de la lexicographie française
2e éd.
EDICTA
Toronto
1997

        