
                
While formulating an Epidoc compliant template for the encoding of ancient
                    inscriptions, it became apparent that it was necessary to accommodate discursive
                    information about various characteristics of an inscription as metadata in the
                    header of a document, and to specify the same characteristics using a controlled
                    vocabulary, to facilitate searching, sorting and indexing. The msDesc features
                    of the TEI guidelines do not actually allow this type of encoding to occur in
                    several crucial places. However, it is possible to achieve both goals by
                    repurposing, and perhaps straining the usage of some TEI features. We will
                    describe the problem and our solution in more detail, in order to document one
                    project’s solution to a common problem, but also to suggest that the TEI
                    Guidelines might be modified to allow this as a more normal use.

                
Epidoc, a TEI P5 schema that has been developed for epigraphical and
                    papyrological materials is widely used for encoding classical and other western
                    inscriptions. Historically, there have been two parallel and converging ways to
                    encode this type of documentary evidence. The first treats the transcription of
                    the text together with descriptive information about the support, context,
                    decoration and history as content, the way it might be if it were published in a
                    book, and enclosing it all within the <text> element. In this type of
                    encoding the TEI header information is brief, serving to document the source
                    publication, and not the inscription. The primary example of this type of
                    encoding is InsAph, which originated as the digital version of a print volume,
                    and represented the publication of record for its inscriptions. The second
                    approach treats the text of an inscription as content, and places contextual
                    information such as the description of the surface the inscription was written
                    on, its date, format and origin as structured metadata in the TEI header. US
                    Epigraphy, which originated as an aggregation of inscriptions, most of which had
                    already been published, is an example of this approach. These approaches have
                    different advantages: the first results in a more readable and more nuanced
                    description of the inscription. The second, in which the placement of
                    information is more predictable and controlled, allows better processing,
                    searching and indexing. 

                
The US Epigraphy project records Graeco-Roman inscriptions that are known to be
                    in United States collections so that they may be located and studied or used in
                    teaching. As such, the metadata that allows the inscription to be searched and
                    sorted by its characteristics is of paramount importance. The project is
                    developing its corpus using an iterative process, by which inscriptions are
                    first recorded as an ID number with bibliographic citations, then metadata and
                    images are added. Transcription and more detailed descriptions, a necessarily
                    slower process requiring more epigraphical expertise, are added as a third step.
                    This progression ensures that the corpus is as complete as possible, and that
                    information is added in a sequence that provides as much information as possible
                    about as large a number of inscriptions as possible. 

                
US Epigraphy, following the TEI P5 version of the Epidoc schema and encoding
                    practices, relies heavily on the TEI header and uses the <msDesc>
                    component of the header to record metadata about an inscription.

                
In <msDesc> there are elements to indicate the genre to which the
                    inscription text belongs (<msItem class=”xx”>), the type of support on
                    which it is inscribed (<objectDesc form=”xx”>) and the material of which
                    it is made (<supportDesc material=”xx”>). These three elements are used to
                    indicate parallel types of information, but unfortunately, they don’t exhibit
                    parallel behaviors. 

                
<msItem> has an attribute to indicate text genre and it can accommodate
                    more discursive detail in a child <p>. The attribute, @class, is a
                    specialized attribute of type “data.code” that allows the msItem to point to a
                    controlled vocabulary of text genres. This is handled through a complex
                    mechanism as follows: the text genres are listed using a <taxonomy>
                    element in <profileDesc>. <textClass>, also part of
                    <profileDesc> then points to a genre in the taxonomy, and msItem/@class in
                    turn, points to <textClass>. This is complicated, but it allows a
                    controlled, and less precise value to co-exist with a more nuanced but less
                    processable description of the text genre. Also, crucially, it maintains the
                    controlled list of genres in the document, and not in the schema. 

                
Conversely, <objectDesc> and <supportDesc> have specialized
                    attributes @form and @material whose values belong to the class
                    “data.enumerated,” forcing their values to be maintained in the schema. This is
                    undesirable, as it means that an encoder, or a content specialist would have to
                    modify the schema in order to change a controlled vocabulary. Changing the
                    values in an enumerated attribute also means that it will no longer be possible
                    to validate different epigraphical projects with the same schema, even though
                    their document structures are fundamentally the same.

                
The ideal solution is to be able to maintain taxonomies within the document, and
                    refer to values within them using an attribute such as @ana, whose value belongs
                    to class “data.pointer.” <taxonomy> provides a powerful and appropriate
                    classification structure, but in the guidelines it is defined as containing only
                    information on text genres, and forming part of the
                    <msItem><textClass> construct. @ana can point to interpretive
                    elements such as <interp> and <fs>, but not <category>, which
                    is the constituent part of <taxonomy>. 

                
Currently, it is possible to create several taxonomies, and to access them using
                    the xi.include mechanism, so that all files and all encoders are using the same
                    controlled vocabularies at all times, and updates are immediate. It is also
                    possible to point to elements in the taxonomies from <objectDesc> and
                    <supportDesc> using an @ana attribute, since @ana is globally available,
                    and points to a valid URI. However, although this validates, it isn’t
                    semantically correct according to the TEI guidelines. A more satisfying solution
                    is to redefine specialized attributes like @support and @material to behave like
                    @ana, and be able to point to controlled vocabularies such a those contained
                    within <taxonomy>. 

                
It is important, when encoding highly structured but also potentially
                    idiosyncratic materials, like inscriptions or papyri, to be able to use both
                    controlled and full-text descriptions. This should be enabled by the markup, but
                    should also be encouraged as good encoding practice. It is also expedient and
                    easier to avoid errors for encoders and programmers to have parallel structures
                    describing similar types of information. 

                
As corpora like US Epigraphy, InsAph, DDDP and similar collections become more
                    concerned with how they will be mined and processed, and are no longer content
                    with creating digital facsimiles to facilitate access, this type of information
                    management is becoming more important. This poster has focused on a few elements
                    and their accompanying attributes. They are not the only places where this
                    problem arises, however. The solution that is presented here is by no means an
                    ideal one. Indeed, it is only permissible insofar as it results in valid TEI
                    documents. There are several other possible approaches. The best solution will
                    be one that results in a set of best practices that can be re-used in other,
                    similar situations. 

            

        
        

                
Epidoc
11/2/2009
InsAph
11/2/2009
TEI Guidelines
11/2/2009
US Epigraphy
11/2/2009

        