This poster presentation will describe a project currently underway under the
                auspices of the Documenting the American South digital publishing program. It has
                been funded by grants from the US National Endowment for the Humanities (Digital
                Humanities Start-Up Grants program) and UNC Chapel Hill. The project is centered
                around the journal of a 19th century student at UNC named James Dusenbery and aims
                to use innovative web-based technology to present the journal and to create modules
                of supplementary material around it to provide insight into Dusenbery's world.

            

                Background
                
The journal that forms the basis of our project was written by James Lawrence
                    Dusenbery (1821-86) during the 1841-42 academic year. Dusenbery, the son of
                    Lydia Davis (1797-1857) and planter Henry Rounsaville Dusenbery (1794-1852) of
                    Lexington, North Carolina, entered the University of North Carolina (UNC) in
                    1839. Sometime before graduating, he began copying out poems and lyrics to
                    popular songs that he admired, and in July 1841 he began “Records of My Senior
                    Year at the University of North Carolina,” a series of 44 weekly entries
                    describing his activities as a University student. He graduated in 1842,
                    received his MD from the University of Pennsylvania's Medical Department in
                    1845, and returned to Lexington to practice medicine. During the Civil War, he
                    served with the Fourteenth Battalion, Rowan County Home Guard. Though he
                    survived the conflict, three brothers, two brothers-in-law, and a niece died
                    during the war years. After the war Dusenbery resumed his medical practice in
                    Lexington and served as a UNC trustee from 1874 until 1877. He died on 24
                    February 1886 and was buried in the Lexington City Cemetery. He never
                    married.

                
Dusenbery's journal, the centerpiece of this new digital collection,
                    provides multiple opportunities to extend his text by creating a multimedia
                    scholarly apparatus that, when combined with an array of interpretive essays,
                    will illuminate the academic, social, political, economic, and religious forces
                    that shaped his world. Though Dusenbery was not “famous” in the ways that our
                    culture assigns such prominence, like many students today he enjoyed his senior
                    year in college. He appreciated his friends; enjoyed sports, music, and dance;
                    and despite an active social life, completed his studies successfully and spent
                    his life as a physician in Lexington, North Carolina. The journal is a valuable
                    source of information for those interested in antebellum culture, antebellum
                    literary life, and the day-to-day events that ordinarily fall through the cracks
                    of history. Edward L. Ayers, southern historian and one of the pioneers of
                    digital libraries, points out that new forms of digitization and spatial display
                    enable scholars and students alike to “see things that are invisible
                        otherwise”.
The Chronicle of Higher Education, 10 November 2006:
                        33
 The Dusenbery Journal's multimedia apparatus will allow users
                    to both see and hear a slice of American history. All of the materials included
                    on the site will be accompanied by scholarly annotations, biographies, and
                    essays that will provide an analytical framework for the project and forge
                    connections between the disparate materials (and disciplines) represented. When
                    it is completed, The Dusenbery Journal will be a fully realized, searchable,
                    multimedia, scholarly edition consisting of manuscript materials, images, songs,
                    artifacts, maps, newspaper clippings, court and judicial documents, and
                    important related resources pulled together from a variety of repositories,
                    especially the University Library's special collections; the North Carolina
                    State Archives; North Carolina public libraries; and the private collection of a
                    family descendant, Colonel William B. Hankins, Jr. The scholarly apparatus for
                    Dusenbery's journal will be accessible to users by means of links within the
                    edited text and through various indexes for personal names, places,
                    publications, images, topics, events, dates, organizations, genres, and
                    authors.

            

            

                Technology
                
Digital images of the pages of the journal have been captured, and the text has
                    been marked up in TEI P5 XML. The handwritten text has been traced and output in
                    a Scaleable Vector Graphics (SVG) format. SVG is itself an XML format, which
                    means structures (i.e. lines, words, and letters) in the image can be linked to
                    lines and notes in the transcribed text. Open Source web mapping software
                    (OpenLayers) is being used to provide zoomable overlays of the SVG and raster
                    image for each page. The result is an interface in which each line of text in
                    the transcription is linked to a line of written text on the page image. The
                    page image and transcription are displayed side-by-side, and OpenLayers provides
                    zoom and pan features for the image.

                
The img2xml system models tracings of manuscript text as Shapes: the SVG paths
                    and bounding boxes; Regions: bounded spaces containing text; and Structures: the
                    overlap of one or more shapes with a Region. Structures can be mapped to
                    elements in a transcription or to annotations.

                
Since SVG is an XML-based format, it can be manipulated in a web browser using
                    standard Javascript techniques. The final project is available at 
http://docsouth.unc.edu/dusenbery.

                
The digital environment has the power to contextualize and fully document this
                    ordinary life, proving, as Nell Sigmon put it, “You don't have to be famous for
                    your life to be history”.
Jacqueline Dowd Hall, interview with Nell Putnam
                        Sigmon, 13 December 1979 (H-143), Southern Oral History Program Collection
                        #4007, Southern Historical Collection, University of North Carolina at
                        Chapel Hill.
 In that, we fully realize one of the most distinguishing
                    features of electronic editions - “their capaciousness: scholars are no longer
                    limited by what they can fit on a page or afford to produce within the economics
                    of print publishing”.
Price, Kenneth (2008). "Electronic Scholarly
                        Editions," in A Companion to Digital Literary Studies, ed. Susan Schreibman
                        and Ray Siemens. Oxford: Blackwell, 2008.

            

        
        

                
Burnard, Lou
Bauman, Syb
TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
                            Interchange
November 8, 2009
ver. 1.5.0. 
Cayless, Hugh
2008
Experiments in Automated Linking of TEI Transcripts to
                            Manuscript Images
TEI Member's Meeting
London
November 2008
Cayless, Hugh
2009
Image as Markup: Adding Semantics to Manuscript
                            Images
DH 2009
University of Maryland, USA
22-25 June 2009

        