This combined poster and software demonstration will introduce ‘Cultures of
                    Knowledge: An Intellectual Geography of the Seventeenth-Century Republic
                    Letters’, launched in January 2009, and based in the Humanities Division of the
                    University of Oxford with funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.
                    Comprising a diverse group of academics and technical experts from the Faculties
                    of History, English, Theology, and Bodleian Libraries, as well as from partner
                    institutions in Britain and east-central Europe, the Project is seeking to
                    reconstruct the correspondence networks that were central to the revolutionary
                    intellectual developments of the seventeenth century. One group is working to
                    catalogue, edit, and preserve the rich archives of scientific correspondence
                    deposited in the Bodleian Library. Another is working with colleagues in
                    Sheffield, Prague, Cracow, and Budapest to enhance and link letter collections
                    elsewhere. Finally, a third group, based in the Systems and e-Research Service
                    (SERS) of Bodleian Libraries, is developing a digital system capable of
                    organising metadata on these materials into an online union catalogue of
                    intellectual correspondence. It is this central feature of our collaboration
                    that we wish to share at DH2010.

                
While meticulously edited and annotated hard copy editions of finite corpora
                    remain indispensable, the intellectual and methodological imperatives for
                    looking beyond traditional modes of publication are overwhelming in the context
                    of the Republic of Letters. No correspondence is an island unto itself. On the
                    contrary, every single letter links at least two different correspondence
                    networks: that of its sender, and that of its recipient. Many
                    seventeenth-century letters passed through multiple hands, either because they
                    were written by or addressed to more than one person, because they passed
                    through intermediaries, or because they were (re)circulated through broader
                    circles of friends and associates after receipt. Moreover, the provision of
                    increasingly frequent, fast, and inexpensive postal services – what has been
                    described as the early modern European ‘media revolution’ – meant that these
                    systems of connections extended over enormous distances. Traditional editions of
                    letters to and from single eminent individuals fail to capture the multilateral,
                    spatially-dispersed character of early modern epistolary cultures, and
                    additional tools are needed in mapping the broader networks which surrounded
                    these canonical figures (networks which are becoming central to research in the
                    history of science and related fields).

                
To this end, capitalizing on the unprecedented opportunities created by ‘digital
                    revolution’ of recent decades, we are proposing to create the nucleus of a
                    web-mounted union catalogue of seventeenth-century correspondence which, for the
                    first time, will provide scholars with a means of navigating the vast, uncharted
                    sea of correspondence that surrounded the comparatively well-surveyed islands of
                    seventeenth-century intellectuals. In its first phase, it will combine three
                    large datasets generated by the Project or already hosted by the Bodleian
                    Library, namely: a digitized version of the existing Bodleian catalogue of
                    seventeenth-century manuscript correspondence (c.26,000 letters); digital
                    calendars of six discrete correspondences generated by our individual research
                    projects (cataloguing the letters of John Aubrey, Jan Amos Comenius, Samuel
                    Hartlib, Edward Lhwyd, Martin Lister, and John Wallis [c.10,000 letters]); and
                    metadata from the seventeenth-century correspondence already included in the
                    Electronic Enlightenment (c.7,000 letters).
See 
http://www.e-enlightenment.com/
 This will result in an
                    integrated database of over 40,000 letters which will provide both a platform
                    for our own future efforts in the field and, it is hoped, a critical mass of
                    material necessary to attract further contributions from elsewhere. 

                
The poster will outline the technological as well as the conceptual underpinnings
                    of this enterprise. We will describe the system architecture of the union
                    catalogue, the Digital Asset Management System (DAMS), an innovative platform
                    developed to support digital library projects within the University of Oxford.
                    The DAMS, based on Fedora software, provides a robust and flexible mechanism for
                    the storage of digital objects within an RDF/semantic web framework. Predicated
                    upon adaptability, scalability, interoperability, and long-term preservation,
                    the system is particularly suitable for our purposes. It allows content to be
                    openly accessible to, and available for reuse by, a geographically dispersed
                    scholarly network; will enable us to share data with electronic repositories
                    elsewhere (and vice versa); and will ensure that the union catalogue will remain
                    accessible to international research long beyond the lifecycle of our original
                    grant. We will also describe the metadata standards by which individual
                    correspondences will be styled as Fedora objects within the system, the RDF
                    ontologies by which they will be related, and the software for web-based record
                    editing, as well as data collection and import, which has been developed
                    especially for the Project. During the poster session itself we will provide a
                    live demonstration of a pilot implementation of the union catalogue. This will
                    showcase its key features (full-text faceted search engine; predefined browsable
                    views; links to select transcriptions and digital images; look-and-feel), as
                    well as the interface for online editing that will allow individual records to
                    be amended, and new records added, by a widely distributed community of academic
                    contributors.

            
    
Key Contacts
Professor Howard Hotson
 (Project Director):
                    
howard.hotson@st-annes.ox.ac.uk

                
Neil Jefferies
 (R&D Manager, SERS):
                    
neil.jefferies@sers.ox.ac.uk

                
Ben O’Steen
 (DAMS Architect, SERS):
                    
benjamin.osteen@sers.ox.ac.uk

                
Sue Burgess
 (Project Systems Developer, SERS):
                    
sushila.burgess@sers.ox.ac.uk

                
Dr James Brown
 (Project Coordinator):
                    
james.brown@history.ox.ac.uk

            

            

                
Further Information
http://www.culturesofknowledge.org

                
More bibliography at 
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/cofk/bibliographies

            

        
        

                
                
Awre, Chris
Swan, Alma
Linking Repositories: Scoping the Development of
                            Cross-Institutional User-Oriented Services
OCLC Systems & Services: International Digital Library
                            Perspectives
23 (2007)
372–81
Berkvens-Stevelinck, Christiane
Bots, Hans
Haeseler, Jens
Les grands intermédiaires culturels de la République des
                            Lettres: Etudes de réseaux de correspondances du XVIe au XVIIIe
                            siècles
Paris
2005
Muchembled, David
2007
Cultural Exchanges in Early Modern Europe
Bethencourt, Francisco
Egmond, Florike
Correspondence and Cultural Exchange in Europe,
                            1400–1700
Cambridge
3 vols
Bots, Hans
Waquet, Françoise
Commercium litterarium, 1600–1750. La communication dans la
                            République des lettres/Forms of Communication in the Republic of
                            Letters
Amsterdam
1994
Davies, John
Fensel, Dieter
, 
van Harmelen, Frank
Towards the Semantic Web: Ontology-Driven Knowledge
                            Management
Hoboken, NJ
2003
Duraspace
Grafton, Anthony
Worlds Made by Words: Scholarship and Community in the
                            Modern West
Cambridge, MA
, 
2009
Jaumann, Herbert
Die europäische Gelehrtenrepublik im Zeitalter des
                            Konfessionalismus
Wiesbaden
2001
Nichols, Stepphen
Time to Change our Thinking: Dismantling the Silo Model of
                            Digital Scholarship
58 (2009)
Ariadne
RDF

            
        