
                
This paper describes the results of our recent work on a 3D prototype called the
                    Simulated Environment for Theatre (SET), which we undertook based on a growing
                    realization that our earlier 2D prototype, called Watching the Script, reified
                    some fundamental biases that would render it less useful for stage directors
                    than we had originally hoped. Having produced the two prototypes, our next step
                    is to carry out a user study to compare their usefulness. We intend to present
                    the results of this user study, combined with a discussion of the meaning of the
                    two designs.

                
The design of Watching the Script features three different perspectives on the
                    text of a play: a microtext column that gives an overview of the length of
                    sections, combined with coloured lines to indicate each character; a reading
                    pane; and a dynamic playback on a stylized stage, where characters move around
                    and their speeches scroll out underneath them.

                
While it has a certain naive charm, the Watching the Script prototype has several
                    fundamental features that make it less than optimal for theatre directors. First
                    is the degree of stylization of the stage, which is restricted to a single shape
                    and does not readily lend itself to customization, either through changing the
                    basic stage design or through applying details in the form of a set. Related to
                    this stylization is the overhead perspective, which makes it difficult to
                    imagine the actual lines of sight of people sitting in the audience.

                
Next is the association between movement and speech. Watching the Script is
                    driven by the XML of the play, which means that character movements are attached
                    to speeches. However, in actual practice, characters are not restricted to
                    moving only when they speak. This emphasis on the speech as the fundamental unit
                    of the play is reinforced through the central role of text in the interface,
                    with each speech occurring simultaneously in three different places. We argue
                    elsewhere (Gabriele et al. 2009) that both of these features make sense from the
                    perspective of English literature, where the central object of study is the
                    text. However, in the staging of a play, we recognize that the text, while still
                    important, is a less central concern. Directors take the text of a play as a
                    starting point, routinely cutting lines, removing entire scenes or characters,
                    and so on.

                
Next is the association between movement and speech. Watching the Script is
                    driven by the XML of the play, which means that character movements are attached
                    to speeches. However, in actual practice, characters are not restricted to
                    moving only when they speak. This emphasis on the speech as the fundamental unit
                    of the play is reinforced through the central role of text in the interface,
                    with each speech occurring simultaneously in three different places. We argue
                    elsewhere (Gabriele et al. 2009) that both of these features make sense from the
                    perspective of English literature, where the central object of study is the
                    text. However, in the staging of a play, we recognize that the text, while still
                    important, is a less central concern. Directors take the text of a play as a
                    starting point, routinely cutting lines, removing entire scenes or characters,
                    and so on. In the Simulated Environment for Theatre, we reconceived the design
                    to better support the affordances that are central to the task of the Director.
                    For example, the character movements are now associated with a timeline rather
                    than with the speeches, so that the character movement and the speeches are both
                    attached to the proposed line of action on stage rather than to the text. We
                    have also introduced the ability to judge the line of sight from any point in
                    the audience by developing the system to load 3D scale models of actual stages
                    and sets. Using the Unity game engine as the programming environment, we
                    inherited the standard game controls for camera movement, so that quite
                    sophisticated variations in perspective are possible. The user can, for
                    instance, switch between cameras situated at different locations, making it
                    possible to quickly see the stage from several angles. It is also possible to
                    switch from the audience perspective to the perspective of any of the
                    actors.

                
Our user study will be carried out early in 2010. We will ask six directors
                    working in industry to try out the two interfaces and provide comments through a
                    thinkaloud protocol. We will also obtain screen captures of these individuals
                    working with the two different systems. Finally, considering pedagogical
                    applications of these interfaces, we will work with a small group of graduate
                    students in theatre education who will consider the affordances of the
                    prototypes for teaching and learning about disciplinary theory and practice. We
                    expect this process to provide additional insights into the choices of
                    functionality for SET, as well as the features of Watching the Script that might
                    be worth adapting for inclusion in the new system.

            

        
        

                
Roberts-Smith, Jennifer
Gabriele, Sandra
Ruecker, Stan
Sinclair, Stéfan
Bouchard, Matt
DeSouza-Coelho, Shawn
Kong, Annemarie
Lam, David
Rodriguez, Omar
2009
The Text and the Line of Action: Re-conceiving Watching the
                            Script
Proceedings of the INKE 2009: Research
                            Foundations for Understanding Books and Reading in the Digital
                            Age
Victoria, BC
23-24 October 2009

        