
                
It is a truth almost universally acknowledged, at least among translator service
                    providers, that some languages take fewer words to express the same thing than
                    some other languages, to the extent that translator remuneration is often
                    calculated accordingly. To further paraphrase Jane Austen and John Burrows: this
                    truth is so well fixed in the minds of the general translating community that
                    the scant reports pointing to the contrary – or, at least, to a possibility that
                    this effect might be exactly contrary to expectations – are either ignored or
                    appear in the wrong journals (
Rybicki,
                        2006
). While this problem is not entirely ignored by traditional
                    translation studies, it is usually dealt with as an aside in publications where
                    this discipline meets corpus linguistics to define and study translator style
                        (
Baker, 1993
, 
1996
, 
2000
), or
                    applied to no more than two languages, very few texts and, more often than not,
                    small sample sizes (
Englund Dimitrova,
                        1994
, 
2003
, 
Pápai, 2004
), or oriented to point out
                    differences between two translations rather than original and translation (
Rybicki, 2009
). Theoretical
                    considerations are just as unsatisfactory. Differences in the level of
                    inflection of the two languages are usually seen as the reason for the
                    differences in length between the native and the foreign version of the same
                    text; the rare exception, i.e. a more or less positive statement on the subject,
                    has been made by George Steiner: “translations are inflationary” (
Steiner, 1978
) in a discussion of
                    explicitation, one of the so-called translation universals (
Baker, 1993
, 
1996
). Still, while explicitation is a mechanism that certainly does
                    involve using more text in the target language to denote less text in the
                    original, it is not clear whether Steiner had any specific textual unit in mind
                    that would undergo inflation – as opposed to another possibility, the inflation
                    of meaning.

                
Indeed, it is even less clear whether mere difference in the number of words –
                    the first and reflexive approach most stylometrists would take – between a novel
                    in one language and another novel, the former's translation, is at all of any
                    scholarly interest; it is quite possible that what matters more is the increase
                    (or decrease) in the number and/or the length of, say, sentences. Even then,
                    however, the differences could be a simple consequence of the divergent
                    linguistic systems and the whole problem should be left at that.

                
It is almost a tradition that, faced with such theoretical quandaries, members of
                    our community turn to empirical practicalities, to experiment – and this is
                    exactly what this paper does. Using a series of fairly extensive bilingual
                    corpora or, simply speaking, combinations of original and translation (and, in
                    some cases, another, and yet another translation of the same text) in a variety
                    of source and target languages, the study compares the sizes, establishes their
                    patterns and their statistical significance (with z-scores). The corpora in
                    question include: English translations of Polish novels by Henryk Sienkiewicz;
                    Polish translations of American, English, French, German and Italian prose
                    (including the interesting sub-corpora of translations of Tolkien and of
                    translations by the author of this paper); French and Polish translations of
                    Shakespeare; Polish and English translation of Latin prose, Portuguese
                    translations of English prose.

                
The results do not paint a uniform picture. While expected general trends can be
                    observed in size variation between pairs of languages, the discrepancies in
                    “inflation rate” between certain rival translations into the same language at
                    times hide any stable “language-to-language” effect. This effect has been
                    hypothetically ascribed at first to differences between inflected
                    (agglutinative) and analytic languages. While this would be difficult to prove,
                    at the same time – barring such extreme cases of translator logorhea as W.S.
                    Kuniczak's famously overflowing translation of Henryk Sienkiewicz's historical
                    romances, where the translation-to-original ratio reaches the vertiginous
                    heights of 170%, the record value in the entire project – some correlation has
                    been observed not so much between the general degree of inflection of a given
                    language as between standardized type-token ratios in each of the studied
                    individual-language corpora. Thus, although it would be too much to say that
                    STTR is a good measure of a language's inflection, the general trend in STTR
                    ranges observed in each of the corpora used in this study corresponds fairly
                    well to the 
inverted
 order of languages exhibiting
                    difference between original and translation (
see Figure below
): translations into English tend to be longer than
                    their Polish originals; Polish translations are shorter than original English
                    novels; most translations of Latin prose tend to be longer than the originals,
                    and so forth. With an important caveat: it only takes an overambitious,
                    overzealous or pathologically lazy translator, or an unscrupulous publisher, to
                    alter this pleasant image beyond recognition.

                
Standardized Type-Token Ratio (Box & Whisker) and
                        Original-to-Translation Ratio (Scatterplot) in Selected Prose Corpora
                    

        
        

                
Baker, M.
1993
Corpus linguistics and translation studies: Implications
                            and applications
Baker, M.
Francis, G.
Tognini-Bonelli, E.
Text and Technology: In honour of John Sinclair
Amsterdam
John Benjamins
17-45
Baker, M.
1996
Corpus-based translation studies: The challenges that lie
                            ahead
Somers, H.
Terminology, LSP and Translation: Studies in language
                            engineering, in honour of Juan C. Sager
Amsterdam
John Benjamins
175-186
Baker, M.
2000
Towards a methodology for investigating the style of a
                            literary translator
Target
12
241-266
Pápai, V.
2004
Explicitation – A universal of translated text?
Mauranen
Kujamäki
Translation Universals. Do they exist?
Amsterdam – Philadelphia
John Benjamins
143-164
Englund Dimitrova B.
1994
Statistical Analysis of Translations (On the basis of
                            translations from and to Bulgarian, Russian and Swedish)
Scandinavian Working Papers on
                            Bilingualism
9
87-103
Englund Dimitrova B.
2003
Explicitation in Russian-Swedish translation:
                            sociolinguistic and pragmatic aspects
Englund Dimitrova B.
Pereswetoff-Morath, A. 
Swedish Contributions to the Thirteenth International
                            Congress of Slavists, Ljubljana, 15-21 August 2003
Lund
Lund University
21-31
Rybicki, J.
2006
Burrowing into Translation: Character Idiolects in Henryk
                            Sienkiewicz's Trilogy and its Two English Translations
Literary and Linguistic Computing
21(1)
91-103
Rybicki, J.
2009
Liczenie krasnoludków. Trochę inaczej o polskich
                            przekładach trylogii Tolkiena
Warszawa
Po co ludziom krasnoludki?
2009
Steiner, G.
1978
After Babel. Aspects of Language and Translation
Oxford
Oxford University Press
reprinted, 1992
253

        