
                
The promise of eLexicography stems not only from the transformation of the
                    production medium, but also from the technological feasibility of representing
                    linguistic complexity. Even though modern lexicography is unimaginable without
                    computer technology (Hockey, 2000a; Knowles, 1989; Meijs, 1992), the sheer use
                    of computers in producing a dictionary or delivering it electronically does not
                    automatically transform a dictionary from "a simple artefact" to a "more complex
                    lexical architecture," to use Sinclair's (2000) formulations.

                
Calling dictionaries “simple artefacts” is itself a rhetorical
                    oversimplification: there is certainly nothing simple about a dictionary —
                    whether we look at it as a material object, cultural product or a model of
                    language. Yet the overall structure of dictionaries as extended word lists has
                    not changed in centuries (Hausmann et al., 1989; Fontenelle, 2008; Atkins and
                    Rundell, 2008). Admittedly, a great deal of factual information is packed into a
                    prototypical lexicographic entry, but a defined term often remains in isolation
                    and insufficiently connected or embedded into the language system as a whole.
                    This is what Miller refers to as the “woeful incompleteness” (Miller at al.) of
                    a traditional dictionary entry, and what Shvedova sees as its “paradoxical
                    nature” — dictionary entries tend to be “lexicocentric” while language itself is
                    “class-centric” (Шведова, 1988).

                
Furthermore, the advances in digital humanities, textual studies and postmodern
                    literary theory do not seem to have had a profound effect on the way we theorize
                    or produce dictionaries. Surely, many important lexicographic projects have been
                    digitalized and gone online; web-portals increasingly offer cumulative searches
                    across different dictionaries; and eLexicography is a thriving field (Lemberg et
                    al., 2001; Hockey, 2000a; de Schryver; Hass, 2005; Nielsen, 2009; Rundell, 2009;
                    Hass, 2005), yet dictionaries — often commercial enterprises which are guided by
                    predominantly economic concerns — remain by far and large discrete objects: no
                    more and no less than digitalized versions of stable, print editions. We still
                    consult dictionaries by going to a particular web site. Dictionaries do not come
                    to us.

                
The time is ripe to ask — both in theoretical and practical terms — a new set of
                    questions: how has the electronic text changed our notion of what a dictionary
                    is (and ought to be); how have the methods of digital humanities and the
                    advances made in digital libraries altered our idea of what a dictionary can
                    (and should) do? And, finally, where do we go from here?

                
The dictionary is a kind of text. In print culture, the dictionary, like every
                    other text, had its material and semantic dimension. The semantic dimension was
                    represented on its visible surface, whereas its depth was in the mind of the
                    reader, or what Eco refers to as the "encyclopedia of the reader." (Eco et al.,
                    1992; Eco, 1979). Yet if we — as we should — start thinking of the dictionary as
                    a kind of electronic text, the way Kathrine Hayles and others have done for
                    electronic literature, we will have no choice but to strip the dictionary of its
                    finality and its "object-ness" and see in it, instead, only one possible
                    manifestation of the database in which it is stored (Hayles, 2003; Hayles, 2006;
                    Folsom, 2007). A digital text can be not only edited, transformed, cut and
                    pasted — as part of our computational textual kinetics — but is always part of
                    other activities: search, downloading, surfing. In other words, an electronic
                    text is unimaginable without its context (Aarseth, 1997; DeRose et al., 1990;
                    Hockey, 2000b).

                
The dictionary, then, should be seen as a kind of semantic potential that can be
                    realized through its use. But in order to truly fulfill this potential, the
                    dictionary needs to be embedded in the digital flow of our textual production
                    and reception. That is why we cannot think of dictionaries any more without
                    thinking about digital libraries and the status which electronic texts have in
                    them (Andrews and Law, 2004; Candela et al., 2007; Kruk and McDaniel, 2009;
                    Maness, 2006; Miller, 2005; Novotny, 2006). To be truly useful for any kind of
                    textual studies, the digital library must "explode" the text (by providing
                    full-content searchability, concordances and indexes, metadata, hyperlinks,
                    critical markup etc.) instead of "freezing" it as an image, which, albeit
                    digital, is computationally neither intelligible nor modifiable as text. In
                    smart digital libraries, a text should not only be an object but a service; not
                    a static entity but an interactive method (Tasovac, forthcoming). The text
                    should be computationally exploitable so that it can be sampled and used, not
                    simply reproduced in its entirety. This kind of atomic approach to textuality
                    poses a host of challenges (legal, ethical, technical and intellectual, to name
                    just a few), but it opens up the possibility of creative engagement with the
                    digital text in literary studies (text mining, statistical text comparison, data
                    visualization, hypertextual systems etc.).

                
The consequence of this "explosive" nature of the electronic text is of paramount
                    importance for eLexcicography and the reformulation of the dictionary not as an
                    object, but a service. We should start thinking of and building dictionaries as
                    fully embeddable modules in digital libraries, or, to put it differently, build
                    digital libraries which integrate dictionaries as part of their fundamental
                    infrastructure and allow an ever-expandable process of associating words in an
                    electronic text with an equally changeable record in a textual database. The
                    changeability of the dictionary entry will, in turn, defer 
ad
                        infinitum
 the notion of a particular dictionary edition — other than as
                    temporary snapshot of the database. The dictionary as an evolving process will
                    be in a permanent beta state.

                
The future of electronic dictionaries undoubtedly lies in their detachability
                    from physical media (CD, DVD, desktop applications) and static locations (web
                    portals). If we think of the dictionary as a service with an API 
The first
                        publicly available dictionary application programming interface was made
                        available by the Wordnik project in October 2009. See 
http://api.wordnik.com/signup/
.
 that can be called from
                    any Web page, we can actually start thinking about any (electronic) text as a
                    direct entry point to the dictionary. If every word in a digital library is a
                    link to a particular entry in the dictionary, electronic textuality as such
                    becomes an extension of lexicography: the text begins to contain the dictionary
                    in the same way that the dictionary contains the text.

                
The Center for Digital Humanities (Belgrade, Serbia) is putting these theoretical
                    considerations into practice while working on its flagship 
Transpoetika Project
 (Tasovac, 2009). 
Transpoetika
 (see Figure 1)  is a collaborative, class-centric, bilingualized
                    Serbian-English learner‘s dictionary based on the architecturally complex,
                    machine-readable semantic network of the Princeton Wordnet (Fellbaum, 1998;
                    Vossen, 1998; Stamou et al., 2002; Tufis et al., 2004). It is part of a
                    scalable, web-based, digital framework for editing and publishing annotated,
                    fully-glossed study editions of literary works in the Serbian language,
                    primarily aimed and students of Serbian as a second or inherited language.

                
Transpoetika
 has been designed to be deployed as a web
                    service and therefore linked from and applied to a variety of textual sources
                    online. Portions of the project, such as the Serbian Morpho-Syntactic Database
                    (SMS) already function as a web service internally and will also be made public
                    and free once the sufficient funding for the project has been secured. 
Transpoetika
 can also interact with other web services:
                    by using Flickr as a source of illustrations, and Twitter as a source of "live
                    quotes" in the entries, the 
Transpoetika
 Dictionary
                    explores the role of serendipity in a lexicographic text.

                
The overarching goal of the Belgrade Center for Digital Humanities (CDHN) is to
                    produce a pluggable, service-based, meta-lexicographic platform for the Serbian
                    language, which will interact with various Web-based digital libraries, and
                    contain not only our own bilingualized Serbian Wordnet, but also historical
                    Serbian dictionaries that the CDHN is digitalizing, such as, for instance, the
                    classic Serbian-German-Latin Dictionary by Vuk Stefanović-Karadžić (1818 and
                    1852). The platform could, in theory, be extended to include and consolidate a
                    number of other, more specialized, lexicons. This is, in any case, the general
                    direction we would like to take.

                
I would like to conclude with a 
hysteron-proteron
, which,
                    in Samuel Johnson's Dictionary of the English language was defined as "a
                    rhetorical figure: when that is last said, which was first done." From the very
                    beginning of this paper, I spoke of the dictionary, which every careful reader
                    would have marked as a serious lexicographic faux-pax. There is and never was
                    such a thing as a singular and uniquely authoritative source of information
                    about words and their meanings. There is no such thing as the (Platonic, ideal)
                    dictionary but rather a myriad manifestations of its imagined hypertextual
                    prototype. I believe, nonetheless, that we should, in the digital age and with
                    the ongoing developments of the digital humanities, reclaim the dusty notion of
                    the dictionary and boldly, though not without self-irony, keep trying to imagine
                    what that "thing" — the dictionary — could be. If only with the goal of making
                    it — in its traditional, leather-bound, sense — completely obsolete.

                

                    
Figure 1
                        

            

        
        

                
Aarseth, E.J.
1997
Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature
The Johns Hopkins University Press
Baltimore, MD
Andrews, J.
Law, D.G.
2004
Digital Libraries: Policy, Planning, and Practice
Ashgate
Aldershot, Hants, England; Burlington, VT
Atkins, B.T.S.
Rundell, M.
2008
The Oxford Guide to Practical Lexicography
Oxford University Press
Oxford; New York
Candela, L.
et al.
2007
The DELOS Digital Library Reference Model: Foundations for
                            Digital Libraries
Vesrion 0.98
de Schryver, G.-M.
2003
Lexicographer's Dreams in the Electronic-Dictionary
                            Age
International Journal of Lexicography
16
143-199
DeRose, S.
et al.
1990
What Is Text, Really?
Journal of Computing in Higher Education
1
3-26
Eco, U.
1979
The Role of the Reader: Explorations in the Semiotics of
                            Texts
Indiana University Press
Bloomington
Eco, U.
et al.
1992
Interpretation and Overinterpretation
Cambridge University Press
Cambridge; New York
Fellbaum, C.
1998
WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database
MIT Press
Cambridge, Mass.
Folsom, E.
2007
Database as Genre: The Epic Transformation of
                            Archives
PMLA
122
1571-1579
Fontenelle, T.
2008
Practical Lexicography: A Reader
Oxford University Press
Oxford; New York
Hass, U.
2005
Grundfragen der elektronischen Lexikographie : Elexiko, das
                            Online-Informationssystem zum deutschen Wortschatz
W. de Gruyter
Berlin; New York
Hausmann, F.J.
Reichmann, O.
Wiegand, H.E.
1989
Wörterbücher: ein internationales Handbuch zur
                            Lexikographie
W. de Gruyter
Berlin; New York
Hayles, N.K.
2003
Deeper into the Machine: The Future of Electronic
                            Literature
Culture Machine
5
Hayles, N.K.
2006
Traumas of Code
Critical Inquiry
33
136-157
Hockey, S.M.
2000a
Dictionaries and Lexcial Databases
Electronic texts in the humanities: Principles and
                            Practice
Oxford University Press
Oxford; New York
146-171
Hockey, S.M.
2000b
Electronic texts in the humanities: Principles and
                            Practice
Oxford University Press
Oxford; New York
Knowles, F.E.
1989
Computers and Dictionaries
Wörterbücher: ein internationales Handbuch zur
                            Lexikographie
Hausmann, F.J.
Reichmann, O.
Wiegand, H.E.
W. de Gruyter
Berlin; New York
1645-1672
Ryszard Kruk S.
McDaniel B.
2009
Semantic Digital Libraries
Springer
Berlin
Lemberg, I.
Schröder, B.
Storrer, A.
2001
Chancen und Perspektiven computergestützter Lexikographie:
                            Hypertext, Internet und SGML/XML für die Produktion und Publikation
                            digitaler Wörterbücher
M. Niemeyer
Tübingen
Maness, J.M.
2006
Library 2.0 Theory: Web 2.0 and Its Implications for
                            Libraries
Webology
3
2
Meijs, W.
1992
Computers and Dictionaries
Computers and Written Texts
Butler, C.
Blackwell
Oxford; Cambridge, Mass.
141-165
Miller, G.A. et al.
Introduction to WordNet: An Online Lexical Database
Five papers on WordNet
Miller, P.
2005
Web 2.0: Building the New Library
Ariadne
45
Nielsen, S.
2009
Reviewing printed and electronic dictionaries: A
                            theoretical and practical framework
Lexicography in the 21st Century. In honour of Henning
                            Bergenholtz
Nielsen, S.
Tarp, S.
John Benjamins
Amsterdam
23-41
Novotny, E.
2006
Assessing Reference and User Services In a Digital
                            Age
Haworth Information Press
Binghamton, NY
Rundell, M.
2009
The future has arrived: a new era in electronic
                            dictionaries
MED Magazine
54
Sinclair, J.
2000
Lexical Grammar
Darbai ir Dienos
24
Stamou, S.
et al.
2002
BALKANET A Multilingual Semantic Network for the Balkan
                            Languages
Proceedings of the International Wordnet
                            Conference
Mysore, India
21-25 January 2002
21-25
Tasovac, T.
2008
Why not every picture is worth a thousand words: digital
                            libraries from a textual perspective
Proceedings of the International
                            Conference "Electronic Libraries - Belgrade 2008"
University of Belgrade
25-27 September 2008
Tasovac, T.
2009
More or Less than a Dictionary: WordNet as a Model for
                            Serbian L2 Lexicography
Infoteka - Journal of Informatics and Librarianship
10
13a - 22a
Tufis, D.
Cristea, D.
Stamou, S.
2004
BalkaNet: Aims, Methods, Results and Perspectives. A
                            General Overview
Science and Technology
7
9-43
Vossen, P.
1998
EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic
                            Networks
Kluwer Academic
Dordrecht, The Netherlands; Boston, Mass.
Шведова, Н.
1988
Парадоксы словарной сатьи
Национальная специфика языка и ее отражение в нормативном
                            словаре. Сборник статьей
Караулов, Ю.Н.
Наука
Москва
6-11

        