
                
Digital humanities practitioners typically deal with polysemous terms by
                    specifying the intended sense of a term in accompanying documentation (when it
                    is one of the set of terms in a schema) or by giving a localized qualification
                    (when the term is being used in a scholarly article). Granted, practitioners do
                    interrogate their use of ubiquitous terms: 'theory,' 'model,' and 'text,' for
                    example, have all been critically examined.
As a representative selection
                        from the existing literature, see Caton "Theory"; Caton "Text Encoding", 
passim
; DeRose et al; Eggert; McCarty, 
passim
; Robinson; Renear "Out of Praxis"; Renear
                        "Theory Restored"; Renear, Durand, and Mylonas.
 These discussions,
                    however, have not visibly affected the prevailing ad hoc, localized approach to
                    sense disambiguation.

                
In ordinary language use multiple senses are the norm: we might hope for greater
                    precision in an academic field, but cannot assume it. "After all," writes Allen
                    Renear apropos of conflicting views on the essential characteristics of
                    textuality, "there is not even a univocal sense of 'text' within literary
                    studies: Barthes's 'text' can hardly be Tanselle's 'text'" ("Out" Note 1 124).
                    The more finely senses are distinguished, though, the greater the need for
                    documentation to point to, the greater the amount of documentation there must
                    be, and the greater the requirement that digital resources make all the
                    necessary pointers available.

                
There is a case, then, for relieving the polysemous burden carried by terms like
                    'text'. This could be done either by shifting some senses onto different terms
                    or by adding an agreed upon set of clearly defined qualifiers to the original
                    term. One example of different terms being available is the FRBR Group One
                    entity types (IFLA Study Group 3.2). It may not have been the 
intention
 of the IFLA Study Group to provide alternatives for 'text',
                    but unquestionably each Group 1 entity type - work, expression, manifestation,
                    and item - corresponds to an existing sense of 'text' and can therefore be used
                    in place of it. However, while these types do capture some broad distinctions,
                    the set is very small.

                
More ambitious is the taxonomy of texts proposed by Shillingsburg as part of his
                    overall concept of a 'script act.'
See 
Resisting
 ch.
                        3. This is a revised version of his "Text" where the term originally used
                        was 'write act.'
 Here the semantic burden is shifted to a qualifying
                    phrase and 'text' has the constant sense of a sign sequence (in material or
                    immaterial state), whose existence is established by at least one material
                    instantiation, and which is intended as a unitary communication (whether
                    actually finished or not). Extrapolating from this, we can say that--in relation
                    to this taxonomy--'textuality' is the exhibiting of such properties, and 'text'
                    as a general phenomenon (that is, as a mass noun rather than a count noun) is
                    some quantity of that which exhibits 'textuality'.

                
These definitions are ours and not Shillingsburg's, but derive from his
                    definitions and are consistent with the principles upon which his taxonomy is
                    based. Furthermore, they accord with common senses of those terms. We emphasize
                    this both because it has methodological implications and because it helps us
                    rethink a notion of 'text' that is well-known in the digital humanities
                    community and to see its proper relation to the senses just described.

                
The quote from Renear given earlier comes from his discussion of "theory about
                    the nature of text" coming out of the electronic text processing and text
                    encoding localities ("Out" 107). The view Renear himself
                    espouses--"Pluralism"--developed as a refinement of the earlier
                    view--"Platonism"--associated with the assertions made by de Rose et al in the
                    paper "What is Text, Really?" This line of thinking has presented itself as 
definitional
, offering a sense to associate with 'text.'
                    Also, by emphasizing its origins in work on automated document processing, it
                    presents this sense of 'text' as 
fundamental
: that is, a
                    more universal sense of 'text' than any sense coming from the traditional
                    humanities localities, because it is as applicable to tax forms, memos, and
                    technical manuals as to novels, plays, and poems. The third thing to note is
                    that this approach has used 'text' in both mass noun and count noun senses
                    interchangeably, and so whatever is said about one applies equally to the other.
                    In the Pluralist view, what defines text is the presence of one or more
                    structures of content objects. We believe this view actually has the opposite
                    effect of what it originally intended because, despite its avowedly universal
                    scope, it actually imposes a greater restriction on what qualifies as a text
                    than Shillingsburg's taxonomy does. Shillingsburg's categories have the form
                    QualifyingLabel+'text', where 'text' has the sense of a sign sequence as
                    described earlier. The sentence "Call me Ishmael." clearly counts as 'text' in
                    Shillingsburg's sense, and equally clearly does not count as 'text' in the
                    Pluralist sense - unless we dilute the sense of the phrase 'content object'
                    until it includes standard linguistic structural units such as the clause, in
                    which case the Pluralist sense simply becomes the same as Shillingsburg's
                    sense.

                
What that line of thinking about text, texts, and textuality that runs from "What
                    is Text, Really?" through "Out of Praxis" actually describes is a property that
                    many--indeed most--texts exhibit, but that is not an 
essential
 property of a text. In a footnote to the discussion in "Out
                    of Praxis" Renear acknowledges that the various meanings 'text' has in the
                    various disciplinary localities do share a common ground, namely that "they all
                    are efforts to understand textual communication." But he continues "I think that
                    taxonomies of sense are best deferred until after we have a better understanding
                    of actual theory and practice" (124). We think the conceptual help afforded by
                    the clarity of Shillingsburg's distinctions shows the opposite is true: having
                    taxonomies in place first betters our theoretical understanding.

                
That last statement brings out the 'chicken and egg' nature of this problem with
                    terminology, as many scholars would doubtless argue that specifying a taxonomy
                    like Shillingsburg's 
presupposes
 one's holding to a
                    particular theory of text/textuality. Debating that, however, would in turn be
                    helped by having a taxonomy of 'theory' available, because what that term means
                    in digital humanities is itself hotly contested.

                
As helpful as we believe Shillingsburg's taxonomy to be, it only clarifies a few
                    items of the "essential vocabulary," and while we think his overall 'script act'
                    framework a good place to start, it needs adding to--for example, in the area
                    that Shillingsburg calls "reception performance" (
Resisting
 77-80). Though he emphasizes his debt to McGann he doesn't
                    attempt a taxonomy of the bibliographic codes that McGann considers such an
                    important feature of production texts (
Textual
 passim).
                    Nor does he really say what happens to the notion of illocutionary point when we
                    move from speech act to script act.
On illocutionary point see Searle 2. We
                        find no treatment of it by Shillingsburg in either 
Resisting
 or 
From Gutenberg
.
 This is work still to be
                    done.

            

        
        

                
Caton, Paul
2003
Theory in Text Encoding
ACH/ALLC Annual Conference
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
May 2003
Caton, Paul
2004
Text Encoding, Theory, and English: A Critical
                            Relation
Dissertation
Brown University
Providence, RI
DeRose, Steven J.
et al.
1990
What is Text, Really?
Journal of Computing in Higher Education
1
2
3-26
Eggert, Paul
2005
Text-Encoding, Theories of the Text, and the
                            Work-Site
Literary and Linguistic Computing
20
4
425-435
IFLA Study Group on the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic
                            Records
2009
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records: Final
                            Report
International Federation of Library Associations and
                            Institutions
Amended and corrected version
McCarty, Willard
2009
Humanities Computing
Palgrave Macmillan
Basingstoke, Hampshire
McGann, Jerome
1988
Social Values and Poetic Acts: The Historical Judgment of
                            Literary Work
Harvard University Press
Cambridge, Mass.
McGann, Jerome
1991
The Textual Condition
Princeton University Press
Princeton, New Jersey
Princeton Studies in Culture/Power/History
Renear, Allen
1997
Out of Praxis: Three (Meta)Theories of Textuality
Electronic Text: Investigations in Method and
                            Theory
Sutherland, Kathryn
Clarendon Press
Oxford
107-126
Renear, Allen
1997
Theory Restored: A Response to Caton
ACH/ALLC Annual Conference
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
June 2004
Renear, Allen
Durand, David
Mylonas, Elli
1996
Refining our Notion of What Text Really Is
Research in Humanities Computing
Ide, Nancy
Hockey, Susan
Oxford University Press
Oxford
Robinson, Peter
2009
What Text Really Is Not, and Why Editors Have to Learn to
                            Swim
Literary and Linguistic Computing
24
1
41-52
Searle, John
1979
Expression and Meaning
Cambridge University Press
Cambridge
Shillingsburg, Peter
2006
From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations of
                            Literary Texts
Cambridge University Press
Cambridge
Shillingsburg, Peter
1997
Resisting Texts: Authority and Submission in Constructions
                            of Meaning
University of Michigan Press
Ann Arbor, Michigan
Shillingsburg, Peter
1991
Text as Matter, Concept, and Action
Studies in Bibliography
44
32-83
Tanselle, G. Thomas
1995
The varieties of scholarly editing
Scholarly Editing: A Guide to Research
Greetham, D.C.
The Modern Language Association of America
New York

        