Poster: Enhancing Museum Narratives: Tales of Things and UCL’s Grant Museum

                    Ross, Claire, 
                    University College London, 
                    
claire.ross@ucl.ac.uk

                

                    Hudson Smith, A., 
                    University College London, 
                    
a.hudson-smith@ucl.ac.uk

                

                    Terras, Melissa, 
                    University College London, 
                    
 m.terras@ucl.ac.uk

                

                    Warwick, Claire, 
                    University College London, 
                    
c.warwick@ucl.ac.uk

                

                    Carnall, Mark, 
                    University College London, 
                    
mark.carnall@ucl.ac.uk

                
Emergent mobile technologies offer museum professionals new ways of engaging
                    visitors with their collections. Museums are powerful learning environments and
                    mobile technology can enable visitors to experience the narratives in museum
                    objects and galleries and integrate them with their own personal reflections and
                    interpretations. UCL’s QRator project is exploring how handheld mobile devices
                    and interactive digital labels can create new models for public engagement,
                    personal meaning making and the construction of narrative opportunities inside
                    museum spaces.

                
The QRator project is located within the emerging technical and cultural
                    phenomenon known as ‘The Internet of Things’: the technical and cultural shift
                    that is anticipated as society moves to a ubiquitous form of computing in which
                    every device is ‘on’, and connected in some way to the Internet. The project is
                    based around technology developed at the Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis,
                    UCL and is an extension of the 
‘Tales of
                        Things’ project
 which has developed a ‘method for cataloguing physical
                    objects online which could make museums and galleries a more interactive
                    experience’ (Giles, 2010) via means of QR tags.

                
The project aims to genuinely empower members of the public within the Grant
                    Museum by allowing them to become the ‘Curators’. The project develops a custom
                    UCL Museums iPhone, iPad and Android application which will be available free of
                    charge from the iTunes store and Android market place.Small printed  QR codes
                     for museum objects will be created, linked to an online database allowing the
                    public to view ‘curated’ information and most notably to send back their own
                    interpretation and views via their own mobile phone. Unique in the UCL
                    technology is the ability to ‘write’ back to the QR codes. This allows member of
                    the pubic to type in their thoughts and interpretation of the object and click
                    ‘send’.  Similar in nature to sending a text message, the system will enable the
                    Grant Museum to become a true forum for academic-public debate, using low cost,
                    readily available technology, enabling the public to collaborate and discuss
                    object interpretation with museum curators and academic researchers.  Visitors
                    narratives subsequently become part of the museum objects history and ultimately
                    the display itself via the interactive label system to allow the display of
                    comments and information directly next to the artifacts.

                
QRator provides the opportunity to move the discussion of objects from the museum
                    label onto users’ mobile phones, allowing the creation of a sustainable, world
                    leading model for two-way public interaction in museum spaces. UCL's Grant
                    Museum of Zoology houses one of the country's oldest and most important natural
                    history collections. The Grant museum has a strong history as a teaching
                    collection but also functions as a key gateway for the public to engage with
                    academic issues in innovative ways.

                
Museums have undergone a fundamental shift from being primarily a presenter of
                    objects to being a site for experiences, which offer visitors opportunities for
                    individual meaning making and narrative creation. Many visitors expect or want
                    to engage with a subject, physically as well as personally (Adams et al 2004;
                    Falk and Dierking 2000). Visitors see interactive technology as an important
                    stimulus for learning and engagement (Falk et al 2002; Black 2005), empowering
                    users to construct their own narratives in response to museum exhibits. Beyond
                    expected content synthesis, these immersive activities can stimulate learning.
                    Engaged within this immersive environment, museum objects become rich sources of
                    innovation and personal growth (Fisher and Twiss-Garrity 2007). When visitors
                    experience a museum which actively encourages individual narrative construction,
                    their activity is directed not towards the acquisition or receipt of the
                    information being communicated by the museum, but rather towards the
                    construction of a very personal interpretation of museum objects and
                    collections. The unpredictability of multiple narrative forms created by the use
                    of mobile devices and interactive labels introduces new considerations to the
                    process by which museums convey object and collection interpretation and opens
                    up museums to become a more engaging experience.

                
The participation in collaborative narrative creation centred around museum
                    objects can provoke creative, independent analysis, promoting a personal
                    connection with museum exhibition subject matter that is unparalleled in more
                    traditional and passive approaches (Silverman 1995; Roberts 1997;
                    Hooper-Greenhill 2000; Fisher and Twiss-Garrity 2007). This research aims to
                    stress the necessity in actively engaging visitors in the creation of their own
                    interpretations of museum collections. This poster presents the development of
                    the QRator project so far, highlights the user centred development activities,
                    its opportunities, challenges and provides an insight into how utilising mobile
                    technology can enhance visitor meaning making and narrative construction.

            
        
References:

            
                

                    
 

                    
 Adams, M., Luke, J. and Moussouri, T. (2004), Interactivity: Moving
                        Beyond Terminology. Curator: The Museum Journal, 47: 155–170 

                    

                        Black, G.
                        2005
                        The Engaging museum: Developing museums for visitor
                            involvement, 
                    

                    

                        Falk, J. H.
                        Dierking, L. D.
                        2000
                        Learning from the Museum: Visitor Experiences and Making
                            Meaning, 
                    

                    
  Falk, J. H.
                        Cohen Jones, M.
                        Dierking, L. D.
                        Heimlich, J.
                        Scott, C.
                        Rennie, L.
                        2002
                         “A multi-institutional study of exhibition interactives in
                            science centers and museums, ” 
                        Unpublished evaluation report. Annapolis, MD: Institute for
                            Learning Innovation, 
                    

                    

                        Fisher, M.
                        Twiss-Garrity., B.A.
                        2007
                         “Remixing Exhibits: Constructing Participatory Narratives
                            With On-Line Tools To Augment Museum Experiences, ”  Trant, J.,
                        Bearman, D. (eds). Museums and the Web 2007: Proceedings.
                            Toronto: Archives and Museum Informatics, 
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        19th October 2010
                    

                    

                        Giles, J.
                        17th April 2010
                         “Barcodes help objects tell their stories, ” 
                        New Scientist, 
                    

                    

                        Hooper-Greenhill, E.
                        2000
                         “Museums and the interpretation of visual culture, ” 
                        Museum Meanings Series, 
                    

                    

                        Roberts, L.C.
                        1997
                        From Knowledge to Narrative: Educators and the Changing
                            Museum., 
                    

                    

                        Silverman, L. H.
                        1995
                         “Visitor meaning making in museums for a new age, ” 
                        Curator, 
                        38(3)
                        161-169
                    

                
            
        