 Panel: The "#alt-ac" Track: Digital Humanists off the Straight and Narrow Path to
                    Tenure

                    Nowviskie, Bethany, 
                    University of Virginia, 
                    
bethany@virginia.edu

                

                    Flanders, Julia, 
                    Brown University, 
                    
julia_flanders@brown.edu

                

                    Clement, Tanya, 
                    University of Maryland, College Park, 
                    
tclement@umd.edu

                

                    Reside, Douglas, 
                    New York Public Library, 
                    
dougreside@gmail.com

                

                    Porter, Dorothy (Dot), 
                    University of Indiana, 
                    
dot.porter@gmail.com

                

                    Rochester, Eric, 
                    University of Virginia, 
                    
err8n@virginia.edu

                

        
            
                
Participants and Presentations

                
Dr. Bethany Nowviskie (moderator): "DH in the #alt-academy Project: Editing Alternate
                        Academic Careers for Humanities Scholars"

                
Director, Digital Research & Scholarship (Scholars' Lab, UVa Library);
                    Associate Director, Mellon Scholarly Communication Institute, University of
                    Virginia

                
Dr. Julia Flanders: "Accounting for Time and Labor in the
                    Knowledge Work of the Digital Humanities"

                
Director, Women Writers Project; Associate Director for Textbase Development,
                    Scholarly Technology Group, Brown University

                
Dr. Tanya Clement: "Off the Tracks: Laying New Lines for
                    Digital Humanities Scholars (Results of an NEH Workshop)"

                
Associate Director, Digital Cultures and Creativity, Honors College; Research
                    Associate, Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH),
                    University of Maryland, College Park

                
Dr. Doug Reside: "Of Ant-Lions and Scholar-Programmers: DH
                    Centers as Ideal Habitat?"

                
Digital Curator for the Performing Arts, New York Public Library

                
Dot Porter, MLIS: "Credential-Creep in the Digital
                    Humanities Job Market"

                
Associate Director for Digital Library Content & Services, Indiana
                    University

                
Dr. Eric Rochester

                
Senior Developer, Digital Research & Scholarship (Scholars' Lab, UVa
                    Library), University of Virginia

            
            
                
Panel Abstract

                
This is a panel session proposed by six established non-tenure-track
                    practitioners and scholars of the digital humanities. Several of us are among
                    the contributors to a forthcoming open-access essay collection on the place of
                    "alternative academics" within the academy. Our goal is to open a discussion of
                    issues from that collection, and from a related NEH-funded workshop on career
                    paths in DH centers, that are relevant to the lives of digital humanists working
                    outside the professoriate.

                
The "#alt-ac" project, to be published in 2011 (online, for comment and
                    extension) by NYU's MediaCommons, features contributions
                    by and for scholars with deep training and experience in the humanities, who are
                    working or seeking employment — off the tenure track — within universities and
                    colleges, or in allied knowledge and cultural heritage institutions such as
                    museums, libraries, academic presses, historical societies, and governmental
                    humanities organizations. For reasons ranging from the professional,
                    intellectual, or institutional to the deeply personal, an increasing number of
                    these people identify themselves as members of the digital humanities
                    community.

                
The work of academic and cultural heritage institutions has long been enriched
                    and enabled by humanities scholars, developers, and administrators like us.
                    Regardless of institutional status, digital humanists maintain sophisticated
                    research, publication, and production profiles and bring methodological and
                    theoretical training to bear on problem-sets of great importance to traditional
                    humanities disciplines and to the scholars who operate within them. However,
                    class divisions between faculty and staff in higher education are profound, and
                    the suspicion or (worse) condescension with which so- called 'failed academics'
                    are sometimes met can be disheartening. Working, as we are often perceived to
                    do, on the margins of C. P. Snow's "two cultures" (or, less polemically, at the
                    interstices of libraries or DH centers and academic departments) digital
                    humanities practitioners are sometimes placed well outside more
                    easily-classified and socially-supported areas of the academic enterprise.

                
For all that, non-tenure-track digital humanists love their work. Many people
                    navigating ill-defined alternative academic career paths speak compellingly
                    about the satisfaction of making teams (and systems, and programs) work, of
                    solving problems and personally making or enabling breakthroughs in research and
                    scholarship in their disciplines, and of contributing to and experiencing the
                    life of the mind in ways they did not imagine when they entered graduate school.
                    Essays in our #alt-ac collection range from personal
                    narratives, positioned within certain academic disciplines and institutions, to
                    staged dialogues on opportunities and pitfalls off the tenure track, to
                    reflective and data-driven essays on the state of academic digital humanities
                    and the (problematic? disruptive? salutary?) position of "alternative academics"
                    within it. A few contributors also illustrate retrograde career paths or offer
                    critiques of the #alt-ac concept. Conversations stemming
                    from the MediaCommons project have sparked a number of other collaborations,
                    such as MITH's "Off the Tracks," an NEH workshop on institutional practices in
                    "laying new lines for digital humanities scholars" — preliminary recommendations
                    from which will be presented here.

                
The six speakers on our proposed panel will offer 7-minute summaries of their
                    research or make position statements based on their published essays, before
                    opening discussion amongst themselves and with the DH conference audience.

                
Briefly, the panelists include:

                
Dr. Bethany Nowviskie of the University of Virginia, who
                    will also moderate the discussion. Nowviskie, who speaks and writes frequently
                    on alternative academic careers in the digital humanities, is the editor of the
                    forthcoming MediaCommons collection. She will frame this panel's discussion with
                    an overview of concepts relevant to the digital humanities that have emerged in
                    all contributed essays and dialogues and will reflect on some issues crucial to
                    DH — such as intellectual freedom and policies related to open source and
                    intellectual property — that were note foregrounded as clearly in the collection
                    as one might expect.

                
Dr. Julia Flanders of Brown University. Flanders will speak
                    to issues raised by her dissertation on the politics of labor in the digital
                    humanities and her #alt-ac essay, "You work at Brown — What do you Teach?,"
                    which examines the pragmatic and psychological effects of divergent practices in
                    accounting for time and labor in knowledge work. How do we think of — and reward
                    — time and effort differently when laborers on very similar projects may
                    alternately be classified as adjunct, tenured, or tenure-track faculty, salaried
                    staff, hourly wage employees, student apprentices and fellowship winners, and
                    post-docs or research staff? What are the implications for our institutions and
                    our digital humanities workforce?

                
Dr. Tanya Clement of the University of Maryland, College
                    Park. Clement will describe the genesis, process, and outcomes of a two-day NEH
                    workshop held at MITH, the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities,
                    in January of 2011. "Off the Tracks: Laying New Lines for Digital Humanties
                    Scholars" will examine best practices across a number of differently-constituted
                    digital humanities labs and centers, with the goal of articulating reasonable
                    career trajectories and professional development opportunities for hybrid
                    academics and scholar-programmers — employees who are not well served by a
                    normative division between "research" usually associated with faculty positions
                    and "service" usually associated with staff roles.

                
Dr. Doug Reside of the New York Public Library. Reside,
                    formerly a "scholar-programmer" at MITH, is Clement's partner in the NEH
                    workshop. His presentation will be informed by that experience and their
                    collaborative drafting of a white paper based on the workshop, but he will also
                    speak to the themes of his #alt-ac essay, "Of Ant-Lions and
                    Scholar-Programmers." Here, he argues that — of several imperfect options for
                    satisfying the two (unified but sometimes contradictory) natures of the digital
                    humanities software developer, a well-defined position in a digital humanities
                    center holds the most promise.

                
Dot Porter, MLIS of the University of Indiana. As a
                    distinguished member of the DH community and the only panelist not holding a
                    doctorate in the humanities, Porter will speak to the issue of "credential
                    creep" in the digital humanities job market. Her #alt-ac essay, co-authored with
                    Amanda Gailey of the University of Nebraska, likens the frequency with which DH
                    jobs are now advertised as requiring a doctorate to the conditions described in
                    William James's 1903 essay, The PhD Octopus. Gailey and
                    Porter examine increasingly stringent job pre-requisites and what they term the
                    "creeping Ivy" of elitism in the context of traditional spirits of
                    entrepreneurship and egalitarianism in the digital humanities. Porter will
                    conclude by offering clear recommendations to DH hiring committees.

                
Dr. Eric Rochester of the University of Virginia. After
                    getting a PhD in English from the University of Georgia, Rochester worked as a
                    computational linguist and programmer for a number of technology firms. He
                    joined the Scholars' Lab at the University of Virginia Library as senior
                    software developer in 2011. His presentation, “There and Back Again,” will
                    discuss transitioning between industry and academia, and how to manage and ease
                    that process for both the individual and the institution. 

                
All six speakers have enthusiastically committed to attend and present at DH in
                    Stanford. We recognize that the presence of "alternative" academic career paths
                    is long-established in the digital humanities — if in generally ad-hoc ways —
                    and will not argue that our roles and observations are fundamentally new.
                    However, we feel strongly that this conference — with its focus on the "big
                    tent" of the digital humanities, and occurring at a time when humanities
                    graduate students are faced with the worst tenure-track job market in memory —
                    is the right moment for a sustained and critical discussion of the opportunities
                    and challenges of DH career-seekers off the straight and narrow path to
                    tenure.

            
        
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        James, W.
                        1903
                         “The Ph.D. Octopus, ” 
                        Harvard Monthly, 
                        36
                        1-9
                    

                    

                        Nowviskie, Bethany
                        2011
                        #alt-academy: Alternative Academic Careers for Humanities
                            Scholars, 
                        MediaCommons: a digital scholarly network
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Off the Tracks: Laying New Lines for Digital Humanities
                            Scholars, 
                        19-20 January 2011
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                
            
        
    