Tutorial: gabmap – A Web Application for Measuring and Visualizing Distances Between
					Language Varieties

					Nerbonne, John, 
					University of Groningen, 
					
j.nerbonne@rug.n

				

					Gooskens, Charlotte, 
					University of Groningen, 
					
c.s.gooskens@rug.nl

				

					Kleiweg, Peter, 
					University of Groningen, 
					
p.c.j.kleiweg@rug.nl

				

					Leinonen, Therese, 
					University of Groningen, 
					
t.leinonen@rug.nl

				

					Wieling, Martijn, 
					University of Groningen, 
					
wieling@gmail.com

				

				
We frequently ask in linguistics, especially in dialectology and comparative
					linguistics, how similar linguistic varieties are to one another, effectively
					asking how similar linguistic culture is from one site to another. We
					operationalize the question more specifically by asking e.g. how similar the
					vocabulary of one variety is to another, or more interestingly how similar the
					pronunciations of a set of varieties are, sampled via the pronunciations of the
					same set of at least 30 words at a range of sites. Since there may be thousands
					of words and hundreds of sites, the questions must be addressed computationally.
					The techniques embodied in the web application have been used in dozens of
					scholarly papers on dialectology (see references).


				
At the University of Groningen the gabmap application has
					been developed that is capable of measuring differences in linguistic samples,
					including in particular sets of phonetic (or phonemic) transcriptions, to
					project present the results graphically onto maps. Gabmap
					is a graphical user interface that implements not only the comparison of
					vocabulary or other categorical data (essentially as percentage overlap or
					percentage difference) but also that of pronunciations via edit distance.
					Because the software is implemented as a web application users are not required
					to download it nor to keep it up to date by following releases. It is fairly
					user friendly and easily accessible and therefore enables experimentation with
					different techniques popular among linguists from various fields, especially
					dialectology and variationist linguistics.


				
During the workshop we will give some theoretical background about dialectometry
					followed by a tutorial where the theory is put into practice with exercises
					showing how to use the web-application. We have given similar courses in
					dialectology previously, for example during the Linguistic Society of America
						Linguistics Institute in 2005 at MIT and to the
					special meeting of the Forum Sprachvariation of the Internationale Gesellschaft füt deutsche Dialektologie in
					Erlangen in Oct. 2010 (
www.sprachwissenschaft.uni-erlangen.de/tagung/programm.shtml
). The
					workshop proposed here will be like the second in that it will include hands-on
					sessions.


				
The workshop will be structured as follows: 
						
Introduction to dialectometry

						
Data entry: uploading dialect data, creating and uploading maps

						
Data inspection: data distribution and error detection

						
Measuring linguistic distances

						
Graphical presentations of linguistic distances: dialect maps

						
Statistical analyses: multidimensional scaling and clustering

						
Data mining, identifying influential individual variables (words,
							pronunciation variants)

					
				

				
We have named the gabmap collaborators as co-authors of
					the tutorial, but only Nerbonne and maximally one other will offer the tutorial.
					We can accommodate up to 20 participants.


				
We add a note to potential participants from non-linguistic fields. In theory one
					might ask the same questions of non-linguistic culture that we ask of linguistic
					culture, namely to what degree is e.g. the material culture of one settlement
					similar to that of another. We suspect that one might attack the non-linguistic
					question using techniques similar to the ones we will demonstrate during this
					tutorial, i.e. one might gather question as, but the point is purely theoretical
					so far, although we would welcome the chance to examine the question in a
					data-intensive way. If such studies are carried out, we suspect that at least
					the mapping facilities we demonstrate in this tutorial will be useful.


			
		
References:

			
				
					

						Alewijnse, B., Nerbonne, J., van der Veen, L. & Manni,
							F.
						2007
						 “A Computational Analysis of Gabon Varieties, ” 
					


					

						Proceedings of the RANLP Workshop on
							Computational Phonology. In P. Osenova et al. (eds.), 
						3–12
						Borovetz, 
					


					

						Gooskens, C. & Heeringa, W.
						2004
						 “Perceptive evaluation of Levenshtein dialect distance
							measurements using Norwegian dialect data, ” 
						Language Variation and Change, 
						16
						3
						189–207
					

					

						Heeringa, W.
						2004
						Measuring dialect pronunciation differences using
							Levenshtein distance. Ph.D. thesis, University of Groningen, 
					


					

						Kessler, B.
						1995
						 “Computational dialectology in Irish Gaelic, ” 
						In Proceedings of the 7th Conference of
							the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
							Linguistics, 
						60–67
						Dublin
						EACL
					

					

						Leinonen, Therese
						2008
						 “Factor Analysis of Vowel Pronunciation in Swedish
							Dialects, ” 
						International Journal of Humanities and Arts
							Computing, 
						2(1-2)
						189-204
					

					

						Nerbonne, J.
						2009
						 “Data-driven dialectology, ” 
						Language and Linguistics Compass, 
						3(1)
						175–198
					


					

						Nerbonne, J. & Siedle, C.
						2005
						 “Dialektklassifikation auf der Grundlage Aggregierter
							Ausspracheunterschiede, ” 
						Zeitschrift für Dialektologie und Linguistik, 
						72(2)
						129–147
					

					

						Prokic, J., Nerbonne, J., Zhobov, V., Osenova, P., Simov, K.,
							Zastrow, T. & Hinrichs, E.
						2009
						 “The Computational Analysis of Bulgarian Dialect
							Pronunciation, ” 
						Serdica Journal of Computing, 
						3(3)
						269–298
					

					

						Spruit, M.
						2006
						 “Measuring syntactic variation in Dutch dialects, ” 
						Literary and Linguistic Computing, special issue on
							Progress in Dialectometry: Toward Explanation [Nerbonne, J.,
							Kretzschmar, W. (eds)], 
						21(4)
						493–506
					

					

						Yang, C. & Castro, A.
						2008
						 “Representing Tone in Levenshtein Distance, ” 
						International Journal of Humanities and Arts
							Computing, 
						2(1-2)
						205–219
					

				
			
		