Poster: Wandering Jew’s Chronicle Research Archive

                    Cummings, James, 
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom, 
                    
James.Cummings@oucs.ox.ac.uk

                

                    Bergel, Giles, 
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom, 
                    
Giles.Bergel@merton.ox.ac.uk

                
Introduction

                
This poster will describe and demonstrate work done in creation of an online
                    archive for research into the Wandering Jew’s Chronicle (WJC). The WJC is a
                    printed ballad published between 1634 and circa 1820 which survives in 22 known
                    copies of 15 editions. These are held in ten libraries in Britain and the USA.
                    The ballad itself outlines the succession to the throne of England from William
                    I to a variable contemporary monarch depending on its date of publication. More
                    specifically these are from the reign of Charles I until that of George IV,
                    taking in seven monarchs in continuations from a core text. The succession of
                    these monarchs is narrated by the supposedly immortal Wandering Jew of European
                    legend. There is immense scholarly interest not only in the subject matter, but
                    textually in the pattern of variations, the length and breadth of its
                    publication and distribution. For a digital humanities perspective the textual
                    history and relationships pose interesting problems for collation and textual
                    analysis. Each one of the editions inherits a basic core text: some of these
                    editions incorporate common continuations or variations, while others are
                    textually idiosyncratic. The editions of the WJC are not only textually but also
                    graphically interesting as most of the editions are illustrated with woodcuts of
                    the monarchs described, and while some editions share woodcuts in common others
                    employ copies or individual illustrations. Some of these editions are
                    historically linked to others through relations within the book trade, while
                    others are unauthorised or independent printings. The poster and demonstration
                    will introduce the benefits of having gathered all the material relating to the
                    WJC in a single place while demonstrating the technologies used to create the
                    research archive.

            
            
                
Wandering Jew’s Chronicle Research Archive

                
Surviving copies of the WJC are scattered: variously held in the Bodleian
                    Library; the British Library; Cambridge University Library; Magdalen College
                    Cambridge, Pepys Library; The University of Texas at Austin Harry Ransom
                    Library; and the Brown University Library. The WJC research archive has created
                    a digital archive in which surviving editions are united under a single
                    authoritative citation and represented by: 
                        
archival­quality images

                        
transcriptions marked­up in TEI P5 XML

                        
visualization tools for comparing variations between texts and
                            images

                        
bibliographical metadata

                        
scholarly commentary

                    
                
                
It is hoped that by providing all of this in one location research into WJC can
                    flourish in new and interesting ways. This resource helps to foster digital
                    humanities research through tracing and expressing bibliographical, textual and
                    iconological relations across a corpus of copies, variant editions, and versions
                    of ballad texts, including their images and tunes. It is a valuable resource for
                    those researching textual genealogy in the early­modern period. It will impact
                    the research of scholars of folklore, balladry, historiography, book history and
                    textual studies.

                
The WJC research archive is an interdisciplinary project that touches on literary
                    and textual studies; art history; historiography; popular culture and folklore;
                    music and of course the digital humanities. It is hoped that in addition to its
                    collaboration with the existing Bodleian Broadside Ballad Database, it will also
                    collaborate with similar projects for creating digital archives of other ballads
                    and related texts in a single coherent manner.

                
One of the key research objectives in the creation of the WJC research archive is
                    the development of a convenient visualization tool for the diachronic
                    representation and scholarly analysis of a popular representation of kingship
                    and English historical continuity. The strengths and limitations for this
                    purpose of the printed ballad form are of particular interest. The archive, and
                    associated research, show both continuities and departures from at least three
                    other comparable forms: oral kinglists; manuscript genealogical chronicles; and
                    iconographic picture­galleries. From its first publication (c.1634), The WJC
                    incorporated up­to­date antiquarian research into the legal documentary sources
                    of royal legitimacy. The text may also be framed within the comparative progress
                    of philological and folkloric inquiry into the origins of national culture and
                    tradition over its span of publication. The WJC research archive seeks to embed
                    this largely forgotten text within a larger history – of historical writing and
                    memorialising in oral, literate and visual cultures, between the antiquarianism
                    of the early seventeenth and the romanticism of the early nineteenth
                    centuries.

            
            
                
Project Outcomes

                
The main outcome of this project to has been the creation of an archive of the
                    WJC text­tradition that facilitates the analytical comparison of its text and
                    images. In one mode, the archive operates as a parallel­text edition, the usual
                    way of representing a chronicle tradition in print, but greatly enhanced by the
                    flexible display options afforded by digital publication. In particular this
                    allows users to compare arbitrarily­selected transcriptions, revealing
                    accidental, typographic and orthographic variation alongside more substantive
                    literary insertions, emendations and continuations, including those supplied for
                    ideological purposes. In another mode, the archive provides visualizations of
                    surrogate images of original documents. 2 Certain editions are bibliographically
                    related through historical relationships within the book trade, which is
                    graphically revealed through publishers’ imprints and their use of variant
                    states or copies of the same wooden printing­blocks. These relationships will be
                    stated and made visible to the user, through a visualisation of the historical
                    sequence of woodcut images, keyed to corresponding portions of the text.

                
A second but important outcome has been then provision of a complete citation of
                    all known versions, editions and copies of the WJC tradition, creating common
                    cataloguing standards for ballad texts in both broadside and chapbook formats
                    that date from across the period. By drawing from materials held in various
                    libraries, the project is promoting the importance of common cataloguing
                    standards, scholarly collaboration and technical interoperability. The value of
                    both bibliographically precise and semantically discerning cataloguing practices
                    is demonstrated, at a time when the considerable promise of mass digitization is
                    in danger of eclipsing the increasingly essential function of the authoritative
                    scholarly catalogue. The WJC research archive engages with union catalogues such
                    as OCLC WorldCat; the English Short­Title Catalogue; the Nineteenth­Century
                    Short­Title Catalogue; and is promoting the idea of a common catalogue of
                    British ballads and chapbooks.

            
            
                
Conclusion

                
While the majority of the technologies used in the creation of the WJC research
                    archive are mature and stable applications, in other aspects it has had to be
                    more innovative in the application and combination of new technologies and
                    bespoke programming. The use of less­traditional digital humanities techniques
                    will be demonstrated and explained alongside the poster.

                
It is hoped that in time the archive will be the centre­piece of a number of
                    related projects about WJC. These include: a study applying image­recogntion
                    techniques to woodcut illustrations, in partnership with Professor Andrew
                    Zisserman (Oxford Visual Geometry Group); an analysis of the registration and
                    publication history of broadside ballads; an exploration of means of visualizing
                    genealogical structure via early­modern letterpress technology, in partnership
                    with Mr. Paul Nash (Bodleian Library); research in the textual transmission of
                    the ballad; and general researches in the genealogical and historical culture of
                    the hand­press period (c.1450­1820). It is hoped that these projects based on
                    the WJC research archive will bring together scholars of balladry, book history,
                    textual studies and digital humanities, and impact wider audiences interested in
                    history, genealogy, folklore and popular culture.

            
        