Poster: Synergies: On the Production of a Sustainable, Open, e-Publication
                    Infrastructure for the Academy

                    Eberle-Sinatra, Michael, 
                    
michael.eberle.sinatra@umontreal.ca

                    Université de Montréal, 
                
This poster will present an overview of Synergies: The Canadian
                        Information Network for Research in the Social Sciences and Humanities,
                    a project funded by the Canada Foundation for Innovation to the order of $13
                    millions in their 2007 program ‘Knowledge Management Resources for the Human and
                    Social Sciences’. The poster will also offer a progress report on the technical
                    challenges for harvesting and displaying various kind of information and data
                    from across the 22 universities involved in this large scale infrastructure
                    project as the project enters its last year of funding. It will be accompanied
                    by a live demonstration of the web-based search interface launched in the spring
                    of 2010.

                
Synergies is a four-year project intended to be a national
                    distributed platform with a wide range of tools to support the creation,
                    distribution, access and archiving of digital objects such as journal articles.
                    It will enable the distribution and use of social sciences and humanities
                    research, as well as to create a resource and platform for pure and applied
                    research. In short, Synergies will be a research tool and
                    a dissemination tool that will greatly enhance the potential and impact of
                    Social Sciences and Humanities scholarship.

                
Canadian social sciences and humanities research published in Canadian journals
                    and elsewhere, especially in English, is largely confined to print. The dynamics
                    of print mean that this research is machine-opaque and hence invisible on the
                    internet, where many students and scholars begin and sometimes end their
                    background research. In bringing Canadian social sciences and humanities
                    research to the internet, Synergies not only brings that
                    research into the mainstream of worldwide research discourse but also it
                    legitimizes online publication in social sciences and humanities. The acceptance
                    of this medium opens the manner in which knowledge can be represented. On one
                    plane, researchers will be able to take advantage of an enriched media
                    palette—color, image, sound, moving images, multimedia. On a second plane,
                    researchers will be able to take advantage of interactivity. And on a third
                    plane, those who query existing research will be able to broaden their vision by
                    means of navigational interfaces, multilingual interrogation and automatic
                    translation, metadata and intelligent search engines, and textual analysis. On
                    still another plane scholars will be able to expand new areas of knowledge such
                    as bibliometrics and technometrics, new media analysis, scholarly
                    communicational analysis and publishing studies. This poster will introduce the
                    main goals of the Synergies project and the impact it
                    will have on the production and dissemination of Canadian research.

                
Scholarly research and communication are undergoing an evolutionary
                    transformation. Research environments, scholarly communication, knowledge
                    sharing and services are moving to the digital and becoming network-oriented.
                    This evolution raises many new questions about models of knowledge sharing.
                    Emerging research environments, data providers, publishers, and libraries will
                    need to develop and deploy a wide variety of new resource models to address
                    these new realities. These resource models will lower the barriers to access and
                    exploitation of research and information resources, serve the needs of
                    individuals and both general and specialized communities, and integrate new
                    models of publication, annotation, communication and knowledge sharing.

                
Synergies will provide a needed infrastructure for the
                    Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) to follow through its
                    in-principle commitment to open access and facilitate its implementation by
                    extending the current venues and means for online publishing in Canada. With Synergies in place the funding of journals based on
                    dissemination effectiveness rather than sales levels will become both feasible
                    for journals and possible as an evaluative criterion for SSHRC funding. The
                    Canadian Federation for the Humanities and Social Sciences, with a membership of
                    over 30,000, has also adopted a position in favor of open access and indicate
                    the role that Synergies can play.

                
Alongside a new web interface and tools for accessing information produced in
                    Canada (with the website to be demonstrated alongside the poster), Synergies will be a digital publishing platform for
                    scholarly publications, with its first goal being to offer digital publishing
                    services prepared to international standards with the lowest cost possible for
                    the editorial production side. This project will thus work as a sustainable,
                    open, e-publication infrastructure for the academy.

                
In sum, this poster will contain an overview of the project, and progress reports
                    on its five regional components. Synergies is the result
                    of a collaboration among five core universities which have been working together
                    for several years. With each partner bringing its own expertise to the
                    initiative, a genuine collaboration resulted in an infrastructure which was
                    conceived from the start as truly scalable and extendable. Each regional node
                    ntegrates the input of current and future regional partners in the development
                    of Synergies, thus continuing to extend its pan-Canadian
                    dimension. For instance, the PKP project is introduced within the broader
                    context of scholarly communications. The Ontario region is presented as a case
                    study, with particular emphasis on project integration with Scholars Portal, a
                    digital library. (The other three regions will also be included in this progress
                    report to the Digital Humanities community.)

            
        