Tutorial: Introduction to Text Analysis With Voyeur Tools

                    Sinclair, Stéfan, 
                    McMaster University, 
                    
sgsinclair@gmail.com

                

                    Rockwell, Geoffrey , 
                    University of Alberta, 
                    
geoffrey.rockwell@ualberta.ca

                
Description

                
Are you interested in using computing methods to analyze electronic texts? 
Geoffrey
                        Rockwell
 (University of Alberta) and 
Stéfan Sinclair

                    (McMaster University) will run a hands-on workshop on using the web-based Voyeur
                    Tools text analysis environment (
voyeurtools.org
). Participants can follow along with
                    example documents or use their own. Voyeur Tools is the latest text analysis
                    web-based system developed by TAPoR collaborators and it brings together
                    visualization and concording tools in a fashion that allows multipanel
                    interactive analysis or single tool analysis. Voyeur Tools runs on a high
                    performance computing cluster and is capable of scaling to handle multiple
                    documents and larger texts than previous web based tools.

                
The workshop will provide:

                
                    
An introduction to basic text analysis concepts and techniques
                        (independent of the tool set being used)

                    
An introduction to different ways of using Voyeur Tools. Voyeur can be
                        used in a multi-panel view where the different tools interact or as
                        individual tools. Users will be shown different ways of running Voyeur Tools
                        and how to manage panels.

                    
Understanding the Voyeur display. Voyeur provides a number of different
                        panels with information from a summary of the corpus to distribution graphs.
                        Participants will be taken through the different panels and the capabilities
                        of each one.

                    
Using Voyeur Recipes for analysis. Participants will be introduced to the
                        Voyeur Recipes, which are tutorials on how to use Voyeur for research tasks.
                        We will start by looking at how Voyeur can be used to explore a theme
                        through a text. We will then look at using Voyeur for diachronic study of a
                        collection of documents over time.

                    
Quoting Voyeur results. Users will be introduced to Voyeur's ability to
                        produce HTML fragments that can be used to quote results in other online
                        documents. With Voyeur you can export your results in various ways, one of
                        which is placing live panels into blogs or wikis.

                    
Integrating Voyeur into remote sites. We have developed specialized
                        plugins that integrate with frameworks such as WordPress, Drupal and OJS.
                        Participants will learn about these as well as how to integrate Voyeur into
                        almost any site with a generic plugin module.

                
            

            
                
Instructors


                
Stéfan Sinclair is an Associate Professor of Multimedia. His areas of interest
                    include computer-assisted literary text analysis, experimental visualization
                    interfaces, and 20th Century French literature (especially Oulipo). He is the
                    creator or co-developer of online Digital Humanities tools such as Voyeur Tools,
                    the TAPoR Portal, the Humanities Visualization Project.

                
Geoffrey Rockwell is a Professor of Philosophy and Humanities Computing at the
                    University of Alberta, Canada. He has published and presented papers in the area
                    of philosophical dialogue, textual visualization and analysis, humanities
                    computing, instructional technology, computer games and multimedia.

            
        