Poster: The Arcane Gallery of Gadgetry: A Design Case Study of an Alternate Reality Game 

               Bonsignore, Beth, 
               
elizabeth.bonsignore@gmail.com

               College of Information Studies, UMD, 
            

               Goodlander, Georgina, 
               
GoodlanderG@si.edu

               Smithsonian American Art Museum, 
            

               Hansen, Derek, 
               College of Information Studies, UMD, 
               
shakmatt@gmail.com

            

               Johnson, Margeaux, 
               University of Florida, 
               
geauxgeaux@gmail.com

            

               Kraus, Kari, 
               
karimkraus@gmail.com

               College of Information Studies, UMD, 
            

               Visconti, Amanda, 
               Department of English, UMD, 
               
amandavisconti@gmail.com

            
Introduction

            
This DH2011 paper describes and analyzes the design process and delivery for The
               Arcane Gallery of Gadgetry (AGOG), a “mini Alternate Reality Game,” that has become
               the seedbed for a larger ARG currently under development by the authors with a
               planned launch date of spring 2011. With generous two-year support from the National
               Science Foundation (NSF), the multi-disciplinary team is conducting exploratory,
               qualitative research at the University of Maryland on the use and creation of ARGs as
               participatory design spaces, information literacy systems, and vehicles for
               scaffolding student learning. The collaborators also include Georgina Goodlander,
               Interpretive Programs Manager at the Smithsonian American Art Museum; and Margeaux
               Johnson, Science and Technology Librarian at the University of Florida. 


            
An Alternate Reality Game is a form of interactive storytelling whose narrative
               elements are distributed over multiple "real-world" platforms, including
               books, mobile devices, and networked computers. They often require participants to
               solve puzzles, answer riddles, and track down information in order to advance the
               storyline. Examples of popular commercial ARGs include games such as “The Beast,” “I
               Love Bees,” and “The Lost Experience.” Although ARGs have been used primarily for
               entertainment, they can also provide unique and powerful educational opportunities.
               World Without Oil and ARGOSI are among the growing number of ARGs created with
               educational, “serious game” goals in mind. 


            
The case study of AGOG focuses on a distinct aspect of ARG design that is well
               positioned to benefit from theoretical insight and methodological inquiry: namely,
               embedding counterfactual story bits into a larger historical framework. 


            
The challenge of counterfactual design is to decide how to purposefully,
               meaningfully, and responsibly depart from the historical record when developing ARGs
               within the context of libraries, schools, museums, and archives--cultural
               institutions that place a high value on trustworthiness and accuracy of information,
               including digital information. The slippage between fiction and reality that is the
               sine qua non of the genre should be just as much the result of premeditation as any
               other aspect of game design. To that end, we propose a theoretical and methodological
               framework for counterfactual design that draws on the neuroscience research of Ruth
               Byrne, the object-oriented philosophy of Ian Bogost, and the cooperative design
               techniques pioneered by Allison Druin in the context of Human Computer Interaction
               (HCI). 


         
         
            
Design Case: The Arcane Gallery of Gadgetry (AGOG) 

            
The design attributes of AGOG, a number of which have already been implemented and
               play-tested, can be conveyed in part with the help of scoping notes: 

            
               
Place and time period: Civil War and Post-War Reconstruction United States.
                  While the Civil War (understood broadly to also include antebellum and post-war
                  periods) helps anchor the ARG temporally, geographically, and—if only
                  tangentially—thematically, these parameters are intended as guidelines, made
                  flexible by the game’s liberal use of time slips, motivated anachronisms, and
                  counter-factual scenarios. 

               
Thematic features: The game includes the following narrative motifs: historical
                  figures communicating across space and time, messages and artifacts intended for
                  posterity, and secret societies whose members may act as stewards of these
                  information-bearing artifacts.

               
Activities, puzzles, and history hacks: AGOG incorporates
                  player-created/-curated artifacts, scavenger-hunt like missions; information
                  search and retrieval exercises; and cryptographic challenges.

               
Aesthetic: The game is steeped in a nineteenth-century retro-futuristic,
                  steampunk style.

               
Learning objectives: A primary objective of AGOG is to use the machinery and
                  conventions of ARGs to scaffold information and new media literacy instruction, as
                  well as to teach subject knowledge in history, science, technology, and
                  math.

               
Tools and technologies: The extended version of AGOG will make use of the
                  technological affordances of smartphones--such as camera, phone, GPS, texting, and
                  web-browsing functionality--to enhance interactivity and integrate the offline and
                  online worlds in creative ways.

            
            
The game’s mythology is grounded in the history of the U. S. Patent Office. The
               Smithsonian American Art Museum, where Georgina Goodlander works, is housed in the
               Historic US Patent Office Building. During the time it functioned as a “Temple of
               Invention” (1836 to 1932), thousands of patents were submitted, along with miniature
               models of the designs, which were put on display. The building also variously served
               as a place of employment, curiosity, ministry, and sociability for a number of
               historically significant figures and personalities, including Abraham Lincoln, Walt
               Whitman, and Clara Barton. The stately halls and galleries of the Patent Office were
               transformed into makeshift barracks and hospital rooms during the Civil War, the grim
               realities of which were temporarily overshadowed by the repurposing of the space for
               Lincoln’s second inaugural ball in 1865. 

            
Collecting all of this historical data in a document, the design team began looking
               for events and places through which it could dig a fictional or counterfactual
               tunnel. In 1877, “the noblest of Washington buildings” was dealt a severe blow when a
               fire broke out and destroyed the collection of 12,000 rejected patent models in the
               attic and damaged another 114,000. It is the fire that provided us with the means to
               traverse fiction and reality, functioning as a joint in which we could embed a
               “rabbit-hole” that would draw players into the game: a mysterious document allegedly
               dating back to the fire of 1877, which cryptically refers to a “Cabinet of
               Curiosities.” Out of the notional fragments of patent models and other mechanical
               remains that ostensibly survived the conflagration, players are asked to help
               reconstruct and curate the Arcane Gallery of Gadgetry by imagining what sorts of
               wondrous, retro-futuristic inventions might have populated it and then creating those
               artifacts using found objects (in the spirit of assemblage art) that have first been
               identified in a database of historic patents. Possible categories of inventions
               include but are not limited to communications devices, weapons and ammunition (think
               secret Civil War technologies), cryptographic devices, and medical equipment. Figure
               1 shows the chronological and conceptual relationships among the factual and
               counterfactual narrative elements in AGOG. Other resources relevant to AGOG,
               including video footage of player-created artifacts for the gallery, can be accessed
               online at http://www.karikraus.com/?p=69. 

            

               
Figure 1. Chronological and conceptual relationships among factual and
                  counterfactual narrative elements in AGOG.

               
Full Size Image 

            
         
         
            
Counterfactual Design

            
The DH2011 paper triangulates between the neuroscience research of Ruth Byrne, the
               object-oriented ontology (OOO) of Ian Bogost, and the HCI cooperative design
               techniques developed by Allison Druin, distilling from them the following set of
               principles and practices for counterfactual design. 


            
Cognitive Science: In The Rational Imagination: How People Create Alternatives to
               Reality, Ruth Byrne explores the “faultlines” or “joints” of reality, those “aspects
               of reality that are more readily changed in imaginative thought.” Byrne’s premise is
               that there are patterns or regularities in terms of where we locate those faultlines:
               some attributes of reality just seem inherently more “mutable” to us than others.
               When we partition, classify, and organize our world, for example, we readily invent
               new instances or members of a category. In the case of AGOG, the design team
               identified a real category—patent collections lost (or presumed lost) in the fire of
               1877—and created a new member for it: the Arcane Gallery of Gadgetry. 


            
Object-Oriented Ontology: In his forthcoming book Alien Phenomenology, Ian Bogost
               offers a practice-led approach to philosophy, one that challenges the notion that the
               inevitable product of philosophical inquiry is a paper, article, or book (“Latour
               Litanizer”). Instead, Bogost describes and models an alternative approach, carpentry,
               which “refers primarily to the construction of artifacts that illustrate the
               perspectives [or inner lives] of objects” (“Latour Litanizer”). As he puts it
               elsewhere, “as critics, our job is to amplify the black noise of objects to make the
               resonant frequencies of the stuffs inside them hum in credibly satisfying ways”
               (“Interview”). Having co-authored Racing the Beam with Nick Montfort in 2009—an MIT
               platform studies book on the Atari Video Computer System--Bogost compellingly
               speculates on how carpentry might help us better apprehend the system’s internal
               hardware design: “What’s it like to be a [Television Interface Adapter]? Or a MOS
               Technologies 6502 microprocessor? How would one characterize such a thing? Would it
               even be possible?” (“Interview”). 


            
The DH2011 presentation describes how this “pragmatic” mode of OOO might be applied
               through circuit-bending—characterized by artists in a popular YouTube video as
               “parallel worlds within a circuit”--to the Arcane Gallery of Gadgetry. 


            
Cooperative Design: Inspired by the prospect of what we might learn about ARGs and
               associated technologies by including children in the design process, we partnered
               with KidsTeam at the HCIL in summer and fall 2010. Adopting an exploratory question
               related to AGOG, we asked the children how they would collaborate with other in-world
               players, especially if they had certain in-game constraints, such as only being able
               to use found objects or materials from a certain time period. Preliminary findings
               suggest that the joints or faultlines of reality exist across multiple semiotic
               domains, and that the gap separating fiction and reality is often managed through
               recourse to metaphor. The DH2010 presentation will elaborate on these findings and
               their implications for the design of tools that support ARGs. 

         
         
            
Funding 


            
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation. 

         
      
References:

         
            
               

                  Nicola Whitton
                  2010
                   “ARGOSI :: Alternate Reality Games for Orientation, Socialisation
                     and Induction, ” 
                  , 
                  Manchester Metropolitan University, Project Manger. April
                  
         (
link
)
   
               

               

                  Bogost, Ian.
                   “Latour Litanizer, ” 
                  16 December 2009
                  
         (
link
)
   
               


               

                  Byrne, Ruth M. J.
                  The Rational Imagination: How People Create Alternatives to
                     Reality, 
                  1st ed
                  The MIT Press
                  2007
               


               

                  DrRek
                  What is Circuit Bending?
                  YouTube
                  10 March 2006
         (
link
)
   
               


               

                  Gratton, Peter
                  Ian Bogost: The Interview
                  Philosophy in a Time of Error (Blog Post)
                  26 April 2010
                  
         (
link
)
   
               


               

                  Ken Eklund (Game Designer, Creative Director and Producer)
                  World Without Oil
                  
         (
link
)
   
                  2007. Web. 1 Nov. 2010
               


               

                  Montfort, Nick, and Ian Bogost.
                  Racing the Beam: The Atari Video Computer System
                  The MIT Press
                  2009
               


               

                  Robertson, Charles J.
                  Temple of Invention: History of a National Landmark
                     Scala Publishers
                  2006
               

            
         
      