Poster: "The Start of a New Chapter": Serialization and the 19th-Century
					Novel

					Truxaw, Ellen, 
					Stanford University, 
					
ellen.truxaw@gmail.com

				

				
Although there have been numerous efforts to theorize the novel, little work
					exists on the chapter. Previous work has focused on the chapter as a device to
					structure the internal events of a narrative, as well as a means to affect
					narrative pace. In his essay “The Chapter in Fiction” Philip Stevick discusses
					the chapter as a structural unit containing events; however, common critical
					assumptions have been divided over whether to treat the chapter as a
					bibliographical or formal unit. This study identifies the chapter as a formal
					unit that is influenced by historical and bibliographic pressures. The chapter's
					ubiquity and seeming formlessness have made it a difficult object of study with
					traditional tools of literary analysis, but techniques in humanities computing
					provide new access to the stylistics of the chapter.


				
In his book, The Sense of an Ending, Frank Kermode describes novels as “fictive
					models of the temporal world” in which readers must find a balance between
					realistic representations of time and necessary narrative deviations from this
					chronicity (Kermode 54-55). My stylistic analysis of the chapter focuses on
					grammatical and semantic temporal markers at the beginnings and ends of
					chapters. By investigating the stylistic trends in 19th century authors’
					treatment of narrative time, I argue that historical, literary-historical, and
					bibliographic forces shape the form and function of the chapter across 19th
					century.


				
By the Nineteenth Century, the novel had been established as a largely
					chapter-based form; however, pressures of serialized publication demanded that
					authors reconsider the way they structured both their narratives and chapters.
					In a letter to Elizabeth Gaskell, Charles Dickens offers advice on how to write
					successful material for serial publication. He writes about what would happen if
					text that is not intended for serial publication gets divided and serialized
					anyway. He writes, "The scheme of the chapters, the manner of introducing the
					people, the progress of the interest, the places in which the principal places
					fall, are hopelessly against it. It would seem as though the story were never
					coming, and hardly ever moving. There must be a special design to overcome that
					specially trying mode of publication" (Grubb 143). Dickens insists that serial
					publication required novelists to rethink the way they structure their
					narratives. This study analyzes both serialized and non-serialized 19th century
					novels to ascertain the extent to which serialization affected the chapter as a
					formal unit.



				
Using distant reading techniques, I have studied stylistic trends in thirty-six
					Nineteenth Century novels: Non-serialized -- Pride and
						Prejudice, Persuasion, Frankenstein, Ivanhoe, The
						Entail (1823), The Last Man, Pelham (1828), The Heir of Redclyffe (1853),
						Barchester Towers (1856), Jane
						Eyre, Villette, Henry
						Esmond,
					Tancred (1847), Mary Barton (1849)
						Mill on the Floss (1860), The Coral
						Island (1858), Black Beauty (1877), Dracula (1897) Serialized-- Jack
						Sheppard, Barnaby Rudge, David
						Copperfield,
					Vanity Fair,
					Hard Times,
					North and South,
					Our Mutual Friend, Far From the Madding
						Crowd, The Woman in White, The
						Moonstone, Middlemarch, Beauchamp's Career, Can You Forgive Her?,
					The Way We Live Now, Wives and
						Daughters, David Copperfield, Treasure Island, The Trumpet Major. I selected
					novels based on their canonicity and tried to study works from a wide historical
					range. By close-reading chapter beginnings and endings, I have created
					classification categories for the main "types" of beginning and endings. These
					"types" treat diegetic temporality in distinct ways through different verb
					tenses and deictic markers. I classified chapter beginnings into the following
					types: 
						
Type 0 — The narrator describes a character or place without direct
							references to diegetic time.

						
Type 1 — The narrator starts the chapter on "the next day"

						
Type 2 — The narrator begins the chapter where he leaves off, or in
								medias res often using the past progressive

						
 Type 3 — The narrator summarizes the events of an interim period
							before entering a scene in the chapter.

						
Type 4 — The narrator uses phrases like "one day" to place the reader
							in an undefined place within diegetic time.

					
				

				
 I differentiate these types based on defining grammatical and semantic markers
					that indicate the author’s different representations of temporality. I read the
					beginnings of every chapter from each of the novels and classify them into the
					category into which they fit best. I then compare the relative frequencies of
					types of chapter beginnings and endings using χ2 tests to determine whether
					significant differences between serialized and non-serialized novels appeared.
					These differences proved significant. Notably, the Type 3 and 4 beginnings
					occurred significantly more frequently in non-serialized novels than serialized
					novels. The difference in the relative frequencies of beginning types in
					serialized and non-serialized novels suggests not only that the chapter exists
					as a formal unit of narrative, but that historical and bibliographic changes
					affect this form.


				
Collaborating with Matthew Jockers and the Stanford Literary Lab, I am continuing
					to look at trends in a wider data set of novels. Matt Jockers has built software
					with the primary purpose of classifying the beginning and ending paragraphs of
					chapters in novels from the Chadwyck Healey 19th century
						British Fiction database. By obtaining data on over 250 novels, I aim
					to investigate the prevalence of particular beginning and end types across the
					19th century as a whole to elucidate how and why authors divide their narratives
					as they do as well as to understand the role narrative time plays in these
					divisions.

			
		
References:

			
				
					

						Grub, Gerald Giles
						 “Dickens' Pattern of Weekly Serialization, ” 
						ELH, 
						9:2
						1942
						141-156
					

					

						Kermode, Frank
						The Sense of an Ending, 
						Oxford University Press
						London
						1966
					

					

						Stevick, Philip
						The Chapter in Fiction; Theories of Narrative
							Division, 
						Syracuse, N.Y.
						Syracuse Univ. Press
						1970
					


				
			
		