Poster: The Colonial Despatches of Vancouver Island and British Columbia: a Digital
                    Edition of a Large-Scale Document Collection

                    Holmes, Martin, 
                    University of Victoria, 
                    
mholmes@uvic.ca

                

                    Shortreed-Webb, Kim, 
                    University of Victoria, 
                    
ksw@uvic.ca

                
The modern Canadian province of British Columbia has been inhabited for at least
                    12,000 years, but its colonial history begins with the visits of Spanish
                    explorers, in the 18
th
 century, followed by voyages by Cook
                    and Vancouver in the 1770s and 1790s. They were followed by other explorers, and
                    by the Hudon's Bay Company, which established trading posts in the region, and
                    became the de facto agents of British colonization until
                    the formal establishment of the colony of Vancouver Island in 1849, and later
                    the British Columbia colony in 1858. The corpus of historical texts in our
                    collection The Colonial Despatches of Vancouver Island and
                        British Columbia (
         (
link
)
   ) currently
                    comprises over 7,000 documents, and covers the years between 1846, when
                    negotiations began between the Colonial Office and the Hudson's Bay Company over
                    the future of the territory, and 1871, when the young colony of British Columbia
                    became a province in the Canadian federation.

                
Our documents have a somewhat troubled history. During the 1980s and 90s, a team
                    led by James Hendrickson transcribed this huge collection into Waterloo Script,
                    to produce a 28-volume print edition, which failed to find a publisher because
                    of its scale. After Dr. Hendrickson retired, the markup files were largely
                    forgotten, until they were rediscovered on an aging server which was scheduled
                    to be shut down. At Digital Humanities 2008, we described how we retrieved the
                    data and converted the Waterloo Script to TEI P5 (Holmes & Newton 2008).

                
Since then, the project has given birth to a full-scale digital edition. In
                    addition to the original transcriptions, we now have over 18,000 page-images,
                    with more being added every week; these are being linked into the transcriptions
                    at every page-break. We have also generated several hundred biographies of
                    people mentioned in the despatches, along with short articles on nearly 200
                    places/locations and 100 ships which feature in the correspondence. In addition,
                    we have acquired digital versions of more than 200 contemporary maps, many of
                    which form part of the correspondence, and we will be adding many more in the
                    coming months.

                
The documents themselves present significant difficulties for transcribers.

                

                    

                        
A simple despatch

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
                
This very short example shows some of the core features, and demonstrates the
                    typical processes through which a despatch from Vancouver Island to London would
                    go. Each despatch received in London would be logged in and assigned a number,
                    then the Colonial Office staff would annotate it with a series of minutes
                    recording their deliberations regarding the appropriate responses; often,
                    letters would be written to other departments in the bureacracy requesting
                    guidance or information, and finally a reply would be drafted (Hendrickson 2008
                    describes this process in detail). At the end of the year, the despatches would
                    be bound into one or more volumes for storage. The peripheral correspondence,
                    including enclosures and attachments with the original despatch, are often bound
                    up with the despatch itself, and the most significant have also been transcribed
                    as part of our collection.

                
In our web application, we have attempted to reproduce all the pertinent features
                    of the original text in a form which makes them more accessible to the reader,
                    while providing easy access to our database of information on people, places,
                    and ships:

                

                    

                        
A digitized despatch

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
                
The correspondence itself is rarely less than entertaining, and frequently
                    exciting; it describes the difficulties encountered by a small, distant and
                    relatively unsupported outpost of empire, struggling to deal with internal
                    conflict, often-hostile First Nations groups, lawlessness, smuggling, and a
                    somewhat threatening American population to the south. There are murders,
                    shipwrecks, gold strikes and adventures of all kinds. However, the collection
                    presents particular difficulties for readers, especially non-experts, arising
                    out of the length of time required for a despatch to make its way between London
                    and Victoria. Between the transmission of a despatch and the receipt of a
                    response addressing its issues and questions, six months might elapse, and
                    during that time, dozens or even hundreds more despatches would be sent. As a
                    result, there is no apparent meaningful sequence in which to read the documents,
                    as one might read an exchange of letters between two correspondents living
                    closer to each other. A good search engine helps, of course, but we have also
                    tried to provide other methods for users to navigate through the collection,
                    through our markup of people, places and vessels. Each instance of one of these
                    items in the text is linked to its "biography", and the biography can retrieve
                    links to every mention of that person, place or ship anywhere in the
                    correspondence, so it becomes possible to find paths through the documents based
                    on these elements. We are also marking up some of the contemporary maps in the
                    collection, using the Image Markup Tool, and integrating
                    them with the place database, so that it is possible to jump from the mention of
                    a place inside a document to a "biography" of the place, and thence to the
                    specific location of that place on any contemporary maps on which it appears, as
                    well as Google Maps.

                
The entire collection (including the maps) is marked up in TEI P5 XML, and the
                    web application is constructed using Apache Cocoon and the eXist XML database.
                    Our poster presentation will deal with our approaches to markup, the web
                    application architecture, and how we have attempted to overcome some of the
                    challenges inherent in the scale and complexity of the collection.

            

        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Hendrickson, James E.
                        2008
                         “The Colonial Office in 1858, ” 
                        The Despatches of British Columbia, 
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Holmes, M. and Newton, G.
                        2008
                         “Rescuing old data: Case studies, tools and
                            techniques, ” 
                        Digital Humanities 2008, 
                        127-131
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    


                
            
        