Poster: Semantically Rich Tools for Text Exploration: TEI and SEASR

                    Ashton, Andrew Thomas, 
                    Brown University Library, 
                    
Andrew_Ashton@brown.edu

                
Much of the existing work of researchers using the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)
                    guidelines has been made available on the web via processes such as XSLT
                    transformations, which are intended to reproduce a work as an enhanced digital
                    surrogate using HTML, PDF, or another publication format. Recent innovations in
                    scholarly software design offer opportunities to exploit the semantic depth of
                    TEI collections by creating new tools for textual analysis; tools that are
                    designed not specifically for digital publication, but for creating mash-ups,
                    data sets, and expressions of semantic data intended for machine-readability,
                    rather than online readership. To explore these opportunities, the Brown
                    University Library’s Center for Digital Scholarship (STG) and the Brown
                    University Women Writers Project (WWP) - with the support of the National
                    Endowment for the Humanities’ Digital Humanities Start-Up Grant program - are
                    developing a prototype suite of software tools to explore TEI encoded texts in
                    the Software Environment for the Advancement of Scholarly Research (SEASR). A
                    demonstration of these tools, information about their availability, and a
                    discussion about their usefulness to digital humanities projects, offers an
                    opportunity to examine this approach to exploring digital texts.

            
            
                
Exploring Data Through Experimentation and Play

                
SEASR is a software environment for creating and sharing text and data mining
                    tools. Textual analyses and visualizations created in SEASR can be shared on the
                    web and adapted by other scholars to support their own research. The
                    characteristic of SEASR that permits such exploration and interchange is its
                    modular approach to software architecture. Modularity – the ability to share and
                    reuse discrete pieces of software within a broader framework – enables
                    relatively simple software tools to be combined to produce results that were
                    previously the domain of complex and often proprietary software. Within the
                    SEASR environment, analysis is modeled as a “flow”: a pipeline, or a series of
                    “components” arranged to produce a specific analysis (see figure 1). Each
                    component in a flow is a small piece of software that ingests and processes
                    data, then passes it to the next component in the flow. Each component performs
                    a single function, but through their recombination and sequencing SEASR enables
                    innumerable potential analyses. Once a flow of components is constructed, it can
                    be made publicly available as a web service and reused on other data. The SEASR
                    framework permits components and flows to be integrated into the publication
                    interface of a digital project (as a way of working with project data), or to be
                    used as part of an independent web-based workbench through which a scholar could
                    examine data drawn from multiple projects. In addition, scholars wishing to
                    demonstrate a new analysis or method can create interactive web applications to
                    make their work accessible and reproducible. And because flows can be flexibly
                    combined and altered, they permit much greater latitude in scholarly inquiry,
                    instead of channeling text analysis into predetermined sequences.

                

                    
Designing a SEASR "flow"

                    

                        
Figure. Designing a SEASR "flow"

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
            
            
                
Working with TEI

                
TEI’s markup logic makes the semantic information encoded in a text tractable for
                    the purposes of extraction, analysis, and reuse. When used in tandem with other
                    data mining and visualization tools available in the SEASR environment (e.g.,
                    MONK, Simile, OpenNLP), these TEI components for SEASR offer new venues for
                    exploring questions germane to literary and textual scholars.

                
As an example, a research scenario involving the WWP texts might include
                    examining the language of specific genres and structures, possibly in relation
                    to other information axes (e.g. time, geography). For example, how does the
                    language of lyric poetry change during the course of the long 18th century? How
                    do women situate themselves as authors (in dedications, letters to the reader,
                    and acknowledgements)? To what extent do women make use of cultural referents
                    from European history in situating their work, and how does this change over
                    time? In pursuing these questions a researcher might use SEASR (either within a
                    project interface such as Women Writers Online, or within a separate workbench
                    application) to:

                
                    
Extract and separate a collection of texts by genre. In addition to
                        offering text-level genre information (based on a basic differentiation
                        between prose, verse, and drama, which MONK also exploits), like many TEI
                        projects the WWP marks genre-specific structures within the text such as
                        poems, dramatic speeches, letters, recipes, essays). SEASR modules can thus
                        identify and extract single genres of interest (all lyric poetry, for
                        instance) or divide the entire corpus by genre (verse, drama, prose, etc.)
                        at a specified level of granularity.

                    
Extract specific pieces of text (quotes, verse stanzas, dedications) for
                        downstream analysis.

                    
Distill from the selected texts or text pieces the personal names, and
                        separate these by type (references to historical figures, mythological
                        figures, biblical figures; place names; etc.)

                    
Sort a subset of data chronologically.

                    
Pass the data through a component that adds morphosyntactic information to
                        each word.

                    
Generate a visualization such as a stacked area chart for each genre that
                        analyzes changes in the association of certain adjectives with personal
                        names, differentiated by gender.

                
            
            
                
Conclusion

                
The primary outcome of this exploration is a set of SEASR components designed to
                    extract and process many commonly encoded semantic features using the TEI P5
                    Guidelines. This poster session will include a demonstration of the TEI tools
                    for SEASR, as well as a discussion of the challenges of developing broadly
                    applicable scholarly software tools such as these. Specifically, it will examine
                    the difficulties and opportunities in designing software to work within a broad
                    and diverse community of practice, such as the TEI community. The software,
                    along with a set of sample analyses, will be available for download in a
                    publicly available repository. In addition, a white paper, including an analysis
                    of likely use-cases for these tools, will be available at the conclusion of the
                    grant.

            
        