Poster: A Visual Interface for Exploring Language Use in Slave Narratives

                    Muralidharan, Aditi, 
                    Department of Computer Science UC Berkeley, 
                    
aditi@cs.berkeley.edu

                
Abstract

                
The increasing prevalence of digitized source material in the humanities has led
                    to uncertainty about how this suddenly available information will change
                    scholars' research methods. What balance will scholars strike between in-depth
                    examination of a few sources, and a more "distant reading" (Moretti 2005) of a
                    large number of them? Our focus is specifically on text collections: comparing
                    texts, and identifying and tracing patterns of language use. These tasks are not
                    widely supported by any current software, but if humanities researchers want to
                    use digitized text collections on a larger scale, they will need to do exactly
                    such things.

                
We restrict ourselves to a particular collection: the North American antebellum
                    slave narratives, written by fugitive slaves in the decades before the Civil War
                    with the support of abolitionist sponsors. Scholars agree about the slave
                    narrative's most basic conventions but it is likely that these narratives, with
                    their extreme repetitiveness, may also manifest other regular features that have
                    yet to be detected by scholars. This project aims to assist literary scholars in
                    uncovering these patterns with computational techniques.

                
In collaboration with English scholars, we have built WordSeer ( 
http://bebop.berkeley.edu/wordseer
), a system that can compare two or
                    more narratives' grammatical features, and analyze the distribution of textual
                    patterns throughout an entire collection. Our goal is for English scholars to be
                    able to use our system to gather accurate information about language use
                    patterns in a way that is intuitive, and natural to them.

                
We will present the system currently under development, and share the lessons we
                    have learned while building a text exploration interface for use in the
                    humanities.

            
            
                
System Description: Computation

                
The goal of the computation is to extract grammatical structure from text. We use
                    established techniques in computational linguistics that allow fast and reliable
                    extraction of phrase boundaries, inter-word relationship categories (e.g.
                    subject, verb, object, modifier etc.) and parts of speech. For example, the
                    sentence, "Marsupial mammals have pouches." contains the meaningful unit
                    "marsupial mammals" that functions as a noun and is therefore a noun-phrase. It
                    further contains the word "marsupial" which is an adjective modifier of the word
                    "mammals", which is a noun. The process is completely general, and can be
                    applied to any TEI-encoded text collection.

            
            
                
System Description: Interface

                
Based on the features that our literary scholar collaborators found useful, our
                    current interface supports three tasks: searching for grammatical or word-based
                    patterns in text (Figures 1 and 2), visualizing their distribution in the entire
                    collection (Figure 3), annotating sections of text with tags and notes (Figure
                    4).
                    

                        
Figure 1: Easily expressing the query, "How was God described?"

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                    

                        
Figure 2: A list of search results augmented with a frequency
                            visualization.

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                    

                        
Figure 3: The distribution of the exact phrase "I was born" through the
                            collection.

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
                
The power of extracting grammatical information is that a list search results is
                    no longer an opaque list: trends and comparative frequencies can be extracted
                    and displayed, giving an instant high-level picture: a guide to further
                    exploration. For example, if a researcher were interested in the relationship
                    between slaves and God, he or she might be interested in how God was described
                    in the collection. Grammatical search makes this query easy to express: just
                    type in "God" and choose the "described as" relationship, as shown in 
Figure 1

                
The search results are augmented with the simple but powerful visualization of
                    relative frequencies shown in 
Figure
                    2
: all the words that God is "described as" arranged from most to least
                    frequent. The presence of the adjectives "great, true, just" immediately evokes
                    a picture of the relationship - one very different from the picture more
                    negative adjectives might paint. While this is no substitute for careful
                    literary analysis, it can be a quick way to judge the extent to which an entity
                    or event is represented a certain way in a collection, and so help formulate new
                    hypotheses.

                
While investigating stylistic similarities between documents in a collection, it
                    is useful to be able to investigate occurrences of patterns of interest and
                    compare their distributions across documents. We use a visualization called heat
                    maps, which uses the visual metaphor of text as a brick wall, with each brick, a
                    section of text, and each column of bricks a document. Typing in a phrase shows
                    its distribution throughout the entire collection, and patterns, such as the
                    overwhelming occurrence (Olney 1984) of the exact phrase "I was born" at the
                    very beginnings of narratives ( 
Figure
                        3
) are easily apparent.

                
The third research behavior we support is that of organizing sections of text
                    into sets that illustrate a point. With our reading and annotation interface (
                        
Figure 4
), researchers can
                    highlight sections of text, and add tags and detailed notes. 
                    

                        
Figure 4: Reading and annotating documents with tags and notes.

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                    Adding a tag to a
                    highlighted section of text is like adding it to a set. Researchers can use the
                    sets they make in other parts of the application: searching within a set, or
                    restricting the heat map visualization to documents in a set.
            
            
                
Related Work

                
In the digital humanities, the closest work to our project comes from two well-
                    known text analytics efforts. The first is the MONK project (MONK) incorporating
                    the SEASR analysis toolkit. These projects offers two computational linguistics
                    tools in addition to word distribution and frequency statistics: tagging words
                    with their parts of speech and extracting named entities. Users can visualize
                    occurrence patterns of word sequences within a chosen text, and plot networks of
                    how often named entities occur near each other. This research led to visual
                    text-mining analyses of Emily Dickinson's correspondence (Catherine Plaisant et
                    al. 2006), and of Gertrude Stein's "The Making of Americans" (Don et al. 2007)
                    and an interface for exploring the parts of speech used near query words of
                    interest (Vuillemot et al. 2009).

                
The second is Voyeur (Voyeur), which operates entirely at the word level. It
                    allows users to plot word frequencies, see concordances (contexts in which words
                    occur) and create tag clouds.

                
Other digital humanities projects have used more advanced language processing,
                    but have not developed them into user interfaces or combined them with
                    visualizations. Topic modeling is being applied to 19th Century British and
                    American novels (Jockers 2010). These novels were also the subjects of
                    cutting-edge computational linguistics research that showed how to automatically
                    extract social networks from free text (Elson et al. 2010). Topic modeling is
                    also being applied to the compendium of Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish folklore
                    collected by Evald Tang Kristensen. In the field of visualization, applications
                    to text in the humanities have been limited to word clouds, and node-and-link
                    diagrams of named entities, and co-occurrences.

                
Outside the realm of text, but in the domain of comparative exploration, LISA, a
                    comparison search interface for cultural heritage artifacts was created by (Amin
                    et al. 2010).

                
The digital humanities work described above comes from the application of ideas
                    from human-computer interaction and natural language processing. We are informed
                    by general principles of search user interface design described by Hearst
                    (Hearst 2009), and of visual exploration of large data-sets described by
                    Shneiderman (Shneiderman 1996).

            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Amin, A.K. et al.
                        2010
                         “Designing a thesaurus-based comparison search interface for
                            linked cultural heritage sources, ” 
                        Proceeding of the 14th international
                            conference on Intelligent user interfaces, 
                        249-258
                    

                    

                        Voyeur Tools: See Through Your Texts | Hermeneuti.ca - The
                            Rhetoric of Text Analysis, 
                        October 29, 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Don, A. et al.
                        2007
                         “Discovering interesting usage patterns in text collections:
                            integrating text mining with visualization., ” 
                        Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM
                            conference on Conference on information and knowledge
                            management, 
                        Lisbon, Portugal, 
                        213-222
                    

                    

                        Elson, D. K.
                        Dames, N.
                        McKeown, K. R.
                        2010
                         “Extracting social networks from literary fiction, ” 
                        Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting
                            of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
                        138-147
                    

                    

                        Hearst, M.
                        2009
                        Search user interfaces, 
                        Cambridge Univ Press
                        http://searchuserinterfaces.com
                    

                    

                        Jockers, M L.
                        What is a Literature Lab: Not Grunts and Dullards | Matthew
                            L. Jockers., 
                        October 29, 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Moretti, F.
                        2005
                        Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract models for a literary
                            history, 
                        Verso Books
                    

                    

                        Olney, J.
                        1984
                         “"I Was Born": Slave Narratives, Their Status as
                            Autobiography and as Literature, ” 
                        Callaloo, 
                        46-73
                    

                    

                        Plaisant, C,  et al.
                        2006
                         “Exploring erotics in Emily Dickinson's correspondence with
                            text mining and visual interfaces, ” 
                        Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE-CS joint
                            conference on Digital libraries, 
                        Chapel Hill, NC, 
                        141-150
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Shneiderman, B.
                        1996
                        The Eyes Have it: A Task by Data Type Taxonomy for
                            Information Visualizations, 
                        April 22, 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Vuillemot, R. et al.
                        2009
                         “What's being said near "Martha"? Exploring name entities in
                            literary text collections, ” 
                        In Visual Analytics Science and Technology: VAST 2009. IEEE
                            Symposium, 
                        107-114
                    

                
            
        