Poster: Better Software Tools for the Humanities and the Social Sciences: a Computer
					Science Perspective 

					Stephenson, Russell, 
					Idaho State University, 
					
steprus2@isu.edu

				

					Kantabutra, Vitit, 
					Idaho State University, 
					
vkantabu@computer.org

				

				
As computer use has become more prevalent in all areas of academia, more and more
					scholars in the humanities and the social sciences have begun to realize the
					potential usefulness of software tools for their respective areas of
					scholarship. Many have become expert in the use of software packages ranging
					from database management systems and GIS to graphical and Web-authoring
					programs, not to mention the more common packages for word processing and the
					creation of presentations.

				
These scholars have also, however, discovered the limitations of current computer
					software. The problems range from lack of user friendliness to gross
					inefficiency and the inflexibility of database systems, to the point that
					important analytical discoveries which should be made are not made. We believe
					that these problems occur because these software packages were created to serve
					limited business purposes, and were co-opted for academic use simply because
					there were no better alternatives available.

				
We will discuss how to improve software for the humanities and the social
					sciences by designing programs based upon computer science principles that are
					at the same time grounded in the needs of humanities scholars, using only those
					software libraries, programming languages and paradigms that truly fit our
					purposes. In particular, we will first explain briefly how our
					Intentionally-Linked Entities (ILE) database system can be used in humanities
					research, social networks and temporal GIS as a replacement for relational
					database management systems. In ILE, relationships are represented using linked
					data structures rather than two-dimensional tables, following the long-term
					trend in other areas of computing towards replacing arrays by linked data
					structures. Relationships of user-defined complexity can be used routinely, and
					unlike in the relational model, such relationships are favored over the use of
					attributes. We will discuss why using ILE instead of other databases can lead to
					more accurate modeling of historical knowledge, as well as an almost complete
					elimination of redundancy.

				
We will present a new software tool we are developing that will allow humanities
					scholars to enter and analyze data. Humanities scholars often have documents
					that contain numerous pieces of interrelated information that need to be
					analyzed to reach an understanding of the material under study. These texts,
					most often word processing documents, are developed over a great deal of time
					from primary sources, requiring a researcher many months or years to compile. It
					is only after this monumental task that the scholar is finally able to start
					piecing together the information that is key to an understanding of the research
					topic. These scholars typically collect data from numerous documents containing
					interrelated players, places, and events. We will present a tool to help gather
					these disparate pieces of information into a database. The user interface for
					this application follows the well-known computer programming paradigm of the
					Integrated Development Environment (IDE), whereby a project is created by
					collecting relevant documents (source files, resource files, and supporting
					data) into a single project file defined by the user. As documents are added to
					the project, they can be analyzed by selecting text and creating entities and
					assigning relationships to those entities via an ILE database. The text and
					matching text in other documents may then be color-coded to make it easier to
					keep track of the entities that have been created. The entities/relationships
					will be stored in an ILE database and displayed as a tree next to the document
					window. We will show an early prototype of this application as well as give an
					overview of the fundamental components: project browser, document windows,
					entity/relationship trees, and the ILE database. We will also discuss
					applications for geographically-integrated history and its relationships to
					social networks and researcher-guided textual analysis.


			
		