Tutorial: Visualization for Literary History

                    Brown, Susan, 
                    English and Humanities Computing, University of Alberta/University
                        of Guelph, 
                    
Susan.Brown@ualberta.ca

                

                    Ruecker, Stan, 
                    English and Humanities Computing, University of
                        Alberta, 
                    
sruecker@ualberta.ca

                

                    Rockwell, Geoffrey, 
                    Philosophy and Humanities Computing, University of
                        Alberta, 
                    
grockwel@ualberta.ca

                

                    Sinclair, Stéfan, 
                    Communications and Multimedia, McMaster University, 
                    
sgs@mcmaster.ca

                
This workshop will present, demonstrate, and provide participants with the
                    opportunity to test and discuss prototypes of several experimental visualization
                    tools for literary studies. The tools will provide a range of approaches to
                    visualizing the Orlando Project’s textbase. Some but not all will allow for
                    input of other data. Although the workshop is focused on literary studies in
                    English, we welcome participants from other related disciplines such as history,
                    philosophy, the history of science, media studies, or library and information
                    science, as well as those with an interest in text visualization generally, and
                    those interested in corpuses in languages other than English.

                
The Orlando Project’s fifteen-year experiment in literary history explores the
                    potential of computers to support new modes of humanities research, particularly
                    the potential of digital technologies to enable interpretive and critical
                    scholarship. The major result of that endeavour, the online Orlando: Women’s Writing in the British Isles from the Beginnings to the
                        Present (Brown et al 2006; orlando.cambridge.org), constitutes the
                    single most extensive and detailed resource in the area, hailed by the Modern
                    Language Association’s Guide to Literary Research as “a
                    model for similar databases that will supplant printed literary dictionaries,
                    encyclopedias, and handbooks” (Harner). Though Orlando
                    resembles a reference work, its electronic structure embeds an entire critical
                    and theoretical framework to support advanced literary historical enquiry. The
                    workshop proposed here will present and allow participants to experiment with
                    prototypes based on emergent methods in text mining and visualization that
                    leverage that embedded structure to enable new discovery paths in literary
                    history.

                
The Orlando textbase—about 80 print volumes’ worth of
                    born-digital scholarship encoded with an XML tagset of more than 250 tags
                    covering the production, characteristics, and reception of texts)—constitutes a
                    rare testbed for investigating the mining of structured text. Its online
                    interface and search system were developed according to W3C standards to exploit
                    the underlying markup, and designed to meet the expectation of text-oriented
                    users of conventional online tools. This existing interface is very
                    search-oriented and entirely textual in its delivery of results.

                
Current research in humanities computing and human-computer interaction is
                    increasingly expanding beyond the text-oriented information retrieval paradigm,
                    to explore instead the many opportunities offered by new, more flexible, more
                    visually-oriented platforms for web delivery (e.g. Ahlberg and Shneiderman 1994;
                    Bederson 2000, 2001; Harris 2006, 2007; Greengrass and Hughes, 2008). In this
                    period of transformation, the scholarly interface requires not only
                    experimentation but also careful assessment to see what works to make digital
                    materials of real value to humanities scholars. As argued by Ramsay (2003),
                    Unsworth (2006), and others, using computers to do literary research can
                    contribute to hermeneutic or interpretive inquiry. Digital humanities research
                    has inherited from computational science a leaning towards systematic knowledge
                    representation. This has proved serviceable in some humanities activities, such
                    as editing, but digital methods have far more to offer the humanities than this.
                    As Drucker and Nowviskie have argued, “The computational processes that serve
                    speculative inquiry must be dynamic and constitutive in their operation, not
                    merely procedural and mechanistic” (431).

                
Our goal for this workshop is to provide those interested in literary studies and
                    the digital humanities with an introduction to some of the tools being developed
                    to support interactive speculative inquiry through text mining and
                    visualization. In the process, we hope to garner insight into users’ reactions
                    to these tools to inform further design and development activities. The
                    prototypes presented at this workshop are being developed as possible interfaces
                    to complement Orlando’s current, more conventional one.

                
The prototypes presented at the workshop will include the following:

                

                    
Mandala Browser: this browser allows users to create “magnets” based on
                        free text or XML search that attract to them items in a text collection, and
                        to visualize the relationships between different sets. It can be used with
                        the Orlando data or with other textual datasets. (Sinclair and
                        Ruecker)

                    

                        
Fig. 1: Mandala Browser

                        
Full Size Image 

                    

                    
Orlando Degrees of Separation tool: this tool shows the connections
                        between individuals in the Orlando data by way of other people, places,
                        organizations, or titles. The challenge is in organizing the visualization
                        of the paths when there are multiple ones, as there frequently are in this
                        highly interlinked set of data


                    

                        
Fig. 2: Orlando Degrees of Separation tool

                        
Full Size Image 

                    


                    
OrlandoVision, a network graph visualization tool: creates a social
                        network graph in which individuals’ names are nodes and links between them
                        are edges, which are color-coded according to the semantic context of the
                        link as represented in the markup

                    

                        
Fig. 3: OrlandoVision graphing tool

                        
Full Size Image 

                    

                    
Breadboard interface for tracing links between individuals and entities: a
                        more textually-oriented interface for browsing links between individuals and
                        entities within the Orlando data

                    

                        
Fig. 4: Orlando Breadboard Interface

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                    
Voyeur: a general-purpose web-based text analysis environment designed for
                        large-scale corpora; includes experimental visualization modules for
                        exploring word trends, named entities, and other textual features



                    
this tools shows the connections between individuals in the Orlando data
                        by way of other people, places, organizations, or titles. The challenge is
                        in organizing the visualization of the paths when there are multiple ones,
                        as there frequently are in this highly interlinked set of data

                    

                        
Fig. 5: Voyeur text analysis environment

                        
Full Size Image 

                    

                    
possibly other visualization tools emergent from current research: we are
                        experimenting with other mining and visualization tools between now and
                        DH2011 and may pull ones that seem to have potential into the workshop
                        program

                

                
This workshop emerges from ongoing research on visualization for literary
                    research, and participants will be asked, but not required, to participate in
                    the study through surveys, interviews, and recording of user sessions in
                    accordance with the ethics protocols approved by our respective
                    universities.

            

        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Ahlberg, C.
                        Shneiderman, B.
                         “The Alphaslider: A compact and rapid selector, ” 
                        Conference proceedings on human factors in computing
                            systems: “celebrating interdependence", 
                        1994
                        365–371
                    

                    

                        Bederson, B.
                        PhotoMesa: A zoomable image browser using quantum treemaps and
                            bubblemaps
                        Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM symposium on user interface
                            software and technology
                        2001
                        71–80
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Brown, Susan
                        Orlando: Women's Writing in the British Isles from the Beginnings to
                            the Present
                        Clements, Patricia
                        Grundy, Isobel
                        2006a
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Drucker, J.
                        Nowviskie, B.
                        Speculative computing: Aesthetic provocations in humanities
                            computing
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities, 
                        Schreibman, S.
                        Siemens, Ray
                        Unsworth, John
                        2004
                    

                    

                        Greengrass, Mark
                        Hughes, Lorna
                        The Virtual Representation of the Past
                        December 2008
                    

                    

                        Harner, James L.
                        Literary Research Guide: An Annotated Listing of Reference Sources in
                            English Literary Studies, 5th edition, 
                        2008
                    

                    

                        Harris, J.
                         “10 by 10: 100 words and pictures that define the time, ” 
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        2006
                    

                    

                        Ramsay, Stephen
                         “Toward an Algorithmic Criticism, ” 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        18.2
                        2003
                    

                    

                        Sinclair, Stéfan
                        Ruecker, Stan
                         “Mandala Rich Prospect Browser, ” 
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        2008
                    

                    

                        Unsworth, John
                         “New methods for Hmanities Research, ” 
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        2006
                    

                
            
        