Poster: Roots of Performatology: From Uber-Marionette to Embodied Performative
               Agent

               Maraffi, Christopher, 
               University of California, Santa Cruz, 
               
topherm@soe.ucsc.edu

            

            
This poster presents humanities research the author completed in Digital Arts and New
               Media that has led to the development of a novel high-level Performatology approach
               to designing embodied agents in Computer Science. Agent research for interactive
               narrative and games have incorporated some performative dramatic theory (Mateas,
               2004; Seif El-Nasr, 2004; Tannenbaum, 2008; Perlin, 1996), but being primarily
               influenced by literary approaches (Laurel, 1991; Murray, 1998; Austin, 1962; Searle,
               1969), the focus has been towards developing a Neo-Aristotelian Poetics approach to
               interactive drama. Some agent work has been done on modeling improvisational
               performers from Theatre Arts (Magerko, 2010), but their micro-agent designs did not
               incorporate embodied gesture. Although additional research has been done on modeling
               the gesture of professional speakers for enhancing the personality of embodied
               conversational agents (Neff, 2008), little work has been done to procedurally model
               professional performers from the arts to enhance the gestural quality of embodied
               agents. 


            
By and large, the emphasis for previous interactive narrative research has been to
               provide story authoring tools rather than tools for embodied performers to represent
               their craft in computational media. Avatars, Non-Player Characters (NPCs), and
               Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVAs), all tend to be designed to function primarily as
               embodied conversational agents, with gestural performance being supportive to speech
               acts that drive the narrative forward. Thus, interactive drama in games is in stark
               contrast to how drama developed in both classical live theatre and moving pictures,
               where gestural performance historically preceded speech acts, and where physical
               drama and visual spectacle dominated textual narrative. 


            
When cinema started, the camera was the entry point for professional performers to
               migrate out of the proscenium and into the screen mediums of film and animation.
               Actors effectively digitized their embodied 3D gesture into animated 2D
               representations that translated their already developed fictive personas into the
               plastic time and space of analog media, where the characters could repeat the
               original performances indefinitely, even after the death of the performers. Multiple
               takes, editing, and visual effects allowed them to iteratively improve their linear
               performances for audiences. The dramatic personas or icons created by media stars of
               the last century arguably eclipse the narrative elements in any single story, and
               indicate a development path for embodied performative agents in New Media today. 

         

         
            
From Uber-Marionette to Avatar Theatre: Imagining the Ideal Performer 


            
Interactive drama has the potential to extend the actor’s craft further than all
               previous acting mediums, but due to a technological divide, actors have been
               prevented from playing on the new stage. The current absence of performing artists in
               computational media, as well as the potential solution to the problem in a procedural
               performer, was anticipated by theater practitioner Edward Gordon Craig at the turn of
               the last century. An influential British theorist working out of Florence, Craig
               self-published his controversial theatre reformation opinions in a periodical called
               The Mask (1907-1929). He advocated the rise of the Director-Designer as a visionary
               artist in charge of all aspects of production, over both the author and players, and
               in this role he faced character believability problems that caused him to question
               the viability of the actor as an artistic medium. Craig particularly struggled with
               the unpredictable personalities of live actors in his productions, which he
               attributed to a fundamental problem of belief in the theatre. He conceptualized the
               perfect actor as one who had a single-minded belief in the idea of the character, in
               the ideal Platonic sense, which would in turn make the audience believe in the
               characterization enough to have an emotional response (Craig, 1963). 


            
A former actor himself, Craig’s views on acting as a belief problem was influenced by
               Neo-classical ritual acting techniques from masked theatre and puppetry. These art
               forms also moved him towards symbolic gesture, along with contemporary influences
               such as the stylized movement of actor Henry Irving and dancer Isadora Duncan, as
               well as the anti-realism of the Symbolists (Ayat-Confino, 1987). His innovative
               productions were larger than life spectacles of moving lights and set pieces, which
               he intended as a new type of immersive Kinetic Stage. Since he was working against
               realism or naturalism, but still wanted to create a believable experience for the
               spectator, designing a consistent theatrical experience was critical to him. But the
               one thing Craig couldn’t control was the live actors in his productions, who he
               claimed did not have the disciplined belief required to reliably portray his desired
               characterizations. So in 1907 he published his infamous essay The
                  Actor and The Uber-Marionette, where he proposed a technological solution to
               his acting problem, and proclaimed that for the artistic future of the theatre, all
               live actors should be replaced by autonomous puppets (Craig, 1907). 


            
In his essay, Craig compared acting to other art forms, and found it came up short.
               His main complaint was against the live actor as a performing medium. When playing in
               front of an audience, Craig claimed that actors allowed their personality or mind to
               get in the way of their characterization. Through either nervousness or ego, they
               would tend to frequently act out of character, breaking the believability of their
               portrayal for the audience. Painters and musicians, as visionary artists, could
               abstract and refine their art forms with complete control. Actors, who often relied
               on their own personality to carry a role, in Craig’s opinion, did not qualify as
               artists. His ingenious solution was to remove the actor entirely from playing in
               front of a live audience. He proposed, for the good of the theatre, that actors had
               to be banned from the stage and replaced with an autonomous puppet he called the
               Uber-Marionette. Craig already used techniques from masked theatre and puppetry to
               insert a performing object between the actor and audience, which was known to create
               a distancing effect for the performer. The Uber-Marionette concept was an extension
               of these techniques intended to entirely remove the actor in form and personality,
               leaving only a refined version of their gesture as an embodied performative
               representation. 


            
Craig’s argument may be sound, but his purposely provocative delivery didn’t receive
               a positive response from the theatre community, especially from actors. So there is
               some theater, to champion the inclusion of live performers in the field of
               computational media today. Clearly ahead of his time, and highly perfomative in
               writing The Mask (Taxidou, 1998), he was often misunderstood by his contemporaries
               who either took his words at face value, or assumed he was writing in metaphors.The
               argument can be made that Craig was actually proposing a vision of the ideal actor
               intended for a future performance medium not yet invented. He said as much in his
               Uber-Marionette essay when he wrote, “If you can find in Nature a new material, one
               which has never yet been used by man to give form to his thoughts, then you can say
               that you are on the high road towards creating a new art. For you have found that by
               which you can create it. It only remains for you to begin. The Theatre, as I see it,
               has yet to find that material.” (Craig, 1907). Though technologically impossible in
               his lifetime, Craig never gave up trying to realize his concept, nor did he ever
               admit that it was impossible to build. Though highly criticized by his
               contemporaries, he showed an unshakeable belief that it would be invented someday by
               discovering a new control mechanism, “What the wires of the Uber-Marionette shall be,
               what shall guide him, who can say?” (Craig, 1963). 


            
Although Craig’s banishment of the actor has inadvertently been realized in
               computational media, the author contends that his vision of the perfect actor as an
               Uber-Marionette can also be realized by modeling the behavior of embodied agents on
               the gesture of live professional performers. If the essence of good acting is
               semiotic gestural technique, or a vector of poses and movements that convey a
               symbolic attitude of the intended persona, then the ideal acting medium is one that
               can iteratively refine a trained performer’s gesture to a singular clear purpose in
               real-time for a live audience. Craig’s imagined “wires” are procedural character
               algorithms trained on motion capture data, and his desired new “material” for Theatre
               is the virtual stage of games and interactive drama. The author’s MFA thesis and
               accompanying Avatar Theatre performances were intended to translate Craig’s vision to
               a New Media context, and to informally assess contemporary audience reaction to
               seeing a live performer interacting with a 3D character in a shared performance space
               (See Figure 1; Maraffi, 2010). 

                  
Figure 1

                  
Full Size Image 

                Audience feedback suggested that, in the context of a live dramatic
               performance, believable interaction and expressive appeal can possibly solve Computer
               Science problems for embodied agents, such as passing a gestural Turing Test and
               offsetting the Uncanny Valley Effect. For instance, there were performances when
               audience members believed that a remote performer was controlling the Avatar
               character, as well as a positive general audience response to comedic interaction
               that countered any strangeness from seeing the avatar mimicking the performer’s
               natural movement. 
         

         
            
From Avatar Theatre to Performatology: Getting the Performer In the Game 


            
So how does the above MFA research apply to games and interactive drama? It is the
               proof-of-concept for developing a Performatology approach to designing embodied
               performative agents at UCSC’s Computational Cinematics Studio. Using this approach
               the author has designed a novel performer modeling agent architecture, IMPRSONA, which uses machine learning and motion capture to build
               a performer profile from a knowledge base of procedural gesture prototypes (see
               Figure 2; Maraffi, 2011). 


                  
Figure 2

                  
Full Size Image 

                We are mapping a performative ontology from Performance Theory (Barba,
               2005; Schechner, 2002; Aston, 1991), and from the author’s experience as a
               performance artist and technical animator, to simulate the apprentice training
               process used by professional performers when learning and practicing their craft
               through mimicry and improvisation. The author’s hypothesis is that the performer’s
               technique, developed over many years of disciplined training, results in a semiotic
               quality of gesture that is integral to portraying believable, expressive, and
               appealing fictive characters. 

            
Puppetry and animation over the last century have shown that abstracting principles
               from live performers can simulate the illusion of life in moving images (Thomas,
               1981), as seen in Disney’s Mickey, Henson’s Kermit, and many other iconic characters,
               creating personas that persist in linear time-based media. These icons indicate that
               the key to solving embodied agent believability problems may be discovered in
               simulating the performer’s gestural quality. Embodied agents in games have the
               potential to become interactive New Media icons if we can represent the performer’s
               craft as procedural algorithms. Our embodied agent architecture is intended as a
               performative component in a broader Nara-Performa-Ludic system design (see Figure 3),
               and is the first step in a formal Performatology study of real and simulated embodied
               performers interacting together in a shared performance space. Our goal is to get the
               professional performer in the game, and get the actor back on the stage of
               interactive drama. 

                  
Figure 3

                  
Full Size Image 

               
            
         
         
            
Acknowledgements: The author would like to thank his current
               Computer Science PhD advisors: Arnav Jhala (UCSC Computational Cinematics Studio) and
               Noah Wardrip-Fruin (UCSC Expressive Intelligence Studio). Also, a very special thanks
               to his Digital Arts and New Media MFA Thesis Committee: Kathy Foley (UCSC Theater
               Arts), Michael Mateas (UCSC Expressive Intelligence Studio), and Ted Warburton (UCSC
               Theater Arts). Additional thanks to his UCSC Theater Arts faculty advisors for the
               2010 DANM Performative Technologies Group: Jim Bierman, David Cuthbert, and Kimberly
               Jannarone. 

         

      
References:

         
            
               
Aston, Elaine and Savona, G.
                  1991 Theatre as Sign System: A Semiotics of Text
                     and Performance, New York
                     Routledge


               
Austin, John
                  1962 How to Do Things With Words, .
                     MassachusettsCambridge


               
Ayat-Confino, Irene
                  1987
                  Beyond the Mask: Gordon Craig, Movement, and the Actor, .
                     Southern Illinois Univ. Press


               
Barba, Eugenio
                  Savarese, N.
                  2005 A Dictionary of Theatre Anthropology: The
                     Secret Art of the Performer, New York
                     Routledge


               
Craig, Edward Gordon
                  1907
                  On the Actor and The Uber-Marionette, The Mask, 
                     (Self-Published Periodical
                     Florence)


               
Craig, Edward Gordon
                  1963
                  The Theatre Advancing, 
                  Benjamin Blom, Inc.
                  New York, NY


               
Laurel, Brenda
                  1991 Computers as Theatre, New
                     York, NYAddison-Weseley


               
Magerko, B
                   Fiesler, C, et al. 
                     2010
                   ““Bottoms Up: Improvisational
                  Mico-Agents”, ” 
                  3rd Workshop on Intelligent Narrative
                     Technologies, , FDG (INT3 2010)


               
Maraffi, Christopher
                  2010 Avatar Theatre MFA Thesis
                  Performances,  (Video Documentation)
                  UCSC Digital Arts and
                  New Media Program
                  
         (
link
)
   


               

                  Maraffi, Christopher
                  Jhala, A.
                  2011 Computational Cinematics Studio
                     Performatology Project: IMPRSONA Performative Agent Architecture, 
                     UCSC Computer Science Program
         (
link
)
   


               
Mateas, Michael
                  2004  ““A Preliminary Poetics for Interactive Drama
                  and Games”, ” 
                  First Person, Wardrip-Fruin and
                  Harrigan, eds.Cambridge, MassachusettsThe MIT
                     Press


               
Murray, Janet
                  1998 Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of
                     Narrative in Cyberspace, Massachusetts
                     The MIT Press


               
Neff, M
                  Kipp, M, et al. 
                  2008
                      “Gesture modeling and animation based on a probabilistic
                     re-creation of speaker style, ” 
                  ACM Transactions on Graphics, 27


               
Perlin, Ken 
                  Goldberg, A.
                  1996  ““Improv: A System for Scripting Interactive
                  Actors in Virtual Worlds”, ” 
                  Proceedings of the 23rd
                     annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 
                     New Orleans


               
Schechner, Richard
                  2002 Performance Studies: An
                  Introduction, New York
                     Routledge


               
Searle, John
                  1969
                  Speech Acts, New
                     YorkCambridge University Press


               

                  Seif El-Nasr, Magy.
                  2004  “A user-centric adaptive story architecture:
                  borrowing from acting theories, ” 
                  ACE '04
                     Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGCHI International Conference on Advances in
                     computer entertainment technology, 
               


               
Tanenbaum, J. 
                  Tanenbaum
                     2008  ““Improvisation and Performance as Models
                     for Interacting with Stories”, ” 
                  ICIDS '08
                     Proceedings of the 1st Joint International Conference on Interactive Digital
                     Storytelling: Interactive Storytelling, 
                  (2008 ICIDS)
               


               
Taxidou, Olga
                  1998
                  The Mask: A Periodical Performance by Edward Gordon
                  Craig, University of Edinburgh
                     UK


               

                  Thomas, Frank
                  Johnston, O.
                  1981 Disney Animation: The Illusion of
                     Life, New YorkDisney
                     Editions

            
         



      