Paper: An Ontological View of Canonical Citations

                    Romanello, Matteo, 
                    Kings College London, 
                    
matteo.romanello@kcl.ac.uk

                

                    Pasin, Michele, 
                    Kings College London, 
                    
michele.pasin@kcl.ac.uk

                
Canonical citations are references to Classical (i.e. Greek and Latin) texts that are expressed by
                    scholars by means of an abridged canonical format (Romanello 2008; Romanello 2007). They fulfil the
                    function of providing an abstract reference scheme for texts (somehow similar to the function of
                    geographical coordinates to express references to places) since they allow us to express references to
                    them no matter what particular text edition we are actually looking at. For example, the reference to
                    the twelfth book of Homer's Iliad expressed as “Hom. Il. XII 1” can be resolved to the text of the same
                    passage as established in various critical editions of that work, where “XII” and “1” are the
                    “coordinates” that allow us to locate that precise text passage within all critical editions of Homer's
                    Iliad.

                
Historically, canonical references are the result of an effort – whose origins can be traced back to the
                    Renaissance (Martin 2003; Berra 2011) – made by the scholarly community as a whole to provide a
                    precise, stable and shared way to refer to Classical texts. Since the early stages of Humanities
                    Computing and Digital Humanities (Bolter 1993; Crane 1987; McCarty 2005), canonical references
                    were regarded as the ideal candidate on which to experiment the potentialities of hypertext: indeed
                    they can be seen as hyperlinks in potentia pointing a text from within another. More recently (Crane et
                    al. 2009) they were considered as a discipline-specific kind of named entities that Classics scholars
                    should be provided with tools to search for within their texts.

                
J.D. Bolter describes classical philology as “the art of explicating an ancient text by exploring its
                    relationships to other specific texts and to the corpus of ancient literature as a whole”. In such a
                    discipline the act of referring to texts – that J. Unsworth has listed among the “scholarly primitives”
                    (Unsworth 2000) – becomes even more crucial than in other disciplines since texts are the very
                    research objects of classical philology and references to them play a key role in constructing
                    argumentations.As N. Smith (2009) has already pointed out, canonical citations reflect an ontological
                    view of texts in this specific domain and specifically how classicists perceive ancient texts as objects.
                    In this paper we present the Humanities Citation Ontology (HuCit)
         (
link
)
   , an ontology that aims at
                    characterising the semantics of citations as they are normally conceived and used in humanistic
                    disciplines. We claim that the specification of such an ontology is worthwhile for at least the following
                    reasons:

                
      
                    
it allows us to disentangle from an ontological point of view the complex relationships
                        between, for instance, a canonical reference found in a journal paper and the manuscripts and
                        editions of the text that we can access via that reference;

                    
it allows us to define types of references and alternative representations of the same reference:
                        this is an important step towards tools that allow automatic formatting of such references
                        according to various styles (as it happens already for modern bibliographic references with
                        Zotero);

                    
it provides us with a way to access the meaning of canonical references beyond their surface
                        appearance, which might vary substantially as in the case of “Hom. Od. I 1” and “α 1”, two
                        canonical references to the same passage but conforming to different citation styles.From an
                        initial analysis of the relevant literature we concluded that none of the existing ontologies
                        actually model the deep meaning of canonical references. An interesting attempt to formalise
                        citations by means of an ontology is CITO (Shotton 2010) which however looks exclusively at
                        modern bibliographic references and focuses in particular on citation types. As it was observed
                        already (Smith 2009; Mimno et al. 2005), the distinction made by FRBR (Functional
                        Requirements for Bibliographic Records) between a work, its expressions and its
                        manifestations can be adapted to represent texts in the Classics domain as well. In this paper
                        we propose an initial implementation of a canonical reference ontology based on FRBRoo
                        which is the result of a process aimed at harmonising FRBR with the CIDOC Conceptual
                        Reference Model (CIDOC-CRM) (Doerr & LeBoeuf 2007).
                    
                
                
A key aspect we have to face is to determine at which ontological level of the cited object a canonical
                    reference is pointing to. A citation such as “Hom. Od. I 1” is it referring to the abstract notion of
                    Odyssey (i.e. a work in the FRBR model) or to a particular version (e.g. edition, translation, etc.) of
                    that work (i.e. a FRBR expression)? It might help to observe that this reference can be solved by a
                    human reader for example into the text of that passage in French translation: therefore it is not being
                    specified at the expression level. The textual coordinates of the citation, namely “first line of the first
                    book”, expressed by the string “I 1” clearly refer to a logical citation scheme that applies already to the
                    abstract notion of Odyssey (i.e. a FRBR work). Thus we can say that a canonical citation follows a
                    given citation scheme that characterises a particular literary text and might differ from one to another.
                    That citation scheme is a conceptual object and is the result of the work of scholars to guarantee the
                    ability of citing literary texts.

                
To illustrate the notion of logical citation scheme as opposed to a physical one let us examine a single
                    case, that is the Athenaeus' Deipnosophistae. Scholars cite this work by means of canonical references
                    that follow a logical citation scheme derived from a physical one (e.g. “Ath. Deipn. XV 694 e-f”). The
                    textual coordinates “694 e-f” refer to the pagination of the edition of the text by Isaac Casaubon dated
                    1598, and specifically to sections “e” to “f” of page 694 of that edition. At first it seems a physical
                    citation scheme. But since all editions after Casaubon's provide the readers with marginal numbers
                    referring to that pagination it became a logical citation scheme: indeed 694 does not refer anymore to a
                    physical page within more recent editions such as Olson's.

                
Canonical citations have both form and content. Different citations might differ by form but they can
                    still have the same content. The content of a citation is the abstract reference of which that citation is
                    an expression. For example, a citation to the first line of Homer's Iliad can be written in several ways
                    according to different citation styles. Nevertheless “Hom. Il. I 1”, “Α 1” and “Homer, Iliad 1.1” are
                    different expressions of the same canonical reference to Homer's Iliad (cited by book and then by line).
                    Given all these reasons, we propose to introduce - among the others - the classes Citation, Reference
                    and Citation_Style to the "E28 Conceptual Object" branch of CIDOC-CRM (we will discuss the
                    details of this approach at the conference, also in the light of most recent activities to harmonise
                    CIDOC and FRBR). Further work is then required in order to extend this conceptual model so that it
                    can support more complex reasoning tasks, such as translation mechanisms among different citation
                    schemes, or the automated extraction of citations from non structured materials.

                
To sum up, in this paper we describe the implementation of an ontology to model canonical references
                    that builds upon the solid conceptual models already defined by CIDOC-CRM and FRBRoo. In the
                    framework of a Classics cyberinfrastructure (Crane et al. 2009), such an ontology is meant to support
                    the interoperability of tools that are being currently developed to extract (Romanello et al. 2009),
                    retrieve (Smith 2009) and solve (Ruddy & Rebillard 2009) canonical references.

            
            
        
References:

            
                
                    
Berra, A.
                        2011
                         “Manier le thésaurus grec., ” 
                        Les main de l'intellect. Lieux de savoir., 
                        C. Jacob
                        Albin Michel
                    Paris

                    
Bolter, J.D.
                        1993
                         “Hypertext and the Classical Commentary., ”  
                        Accessing antiquity : the
                        computerization of classical studies, 
                        University of Arizona Press
                        Tucson
                        157-171

                    
Crane, G.
                        1987
                         “From the old to the new: intergrating hypertext into traditional scholarship., ”  
                        Proceedings of the ACM conference on Hypertext, 
                        Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States, 
                    51-55
                        February
                        2, 2009
                        
         (
link
)
    

                    
Crane, G., Seales, B. & Terras, M.
                        2009
                         “Cyberinfrastructure for Classical Philology., ”  
                        Digital
                        Humanities Quarterly, 
                        3(1)
                        July 19, 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Doerr, M. & LeBoeuf, P.
                        2007
                         “Modelling Intellectual Processes: The FRBR - CRM Harmonization., ” 
                        Digital Libraries: Research and Development. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
                    C. Thanos, F. Borri, & L. Candela, eds. 
                        D. Springer 
                        Berlin / Heidelberg
                        114-123
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Martin, H.
                        2003
                         “Du livre a la lecture., ”  
                        Des Alexandries II. Les métamorphoses du lecteur, 
                        C. Jacob
                        Bibliothèque nationale de France
                        35-45
                        October 26, 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
McCarty, W.
                        2005
                        Humanities Computing, 
                        Palgrave Macmillan

                    
Mimno, D., Crane, G. & Jones, A.
                        2005
                         “Hierarchical Catalog Records, ” 
                        D-Lib Magazine, 
                        11(10)
                        July 22, 2010
                    
         (
link
)
   

                    
Romanello, M.
                        2008
                         “A semantic linking framework to provide critical value-added services for Ejournals
                        on classics., ”  
                        ELPUB2008. Open Scholarship: Authority,
                        Community, and Sustainability in the Age of Web 2.0 - Proceedings of the 12th International
                        Conference on Electronic Publishing, 
                        S. Mornati & L. Chan, eds.  
                        Toronto, Canada,  
                        25-27 June 2008
                        401-414
                        August 11, 2008
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Romanello, M.
                        2007
                         “A Semantic Linking System for Canonical References to Electronic Corpora., ” 
                        International Conference on Electronic Corpora of Ancient Languages :
                        proceedings of the international conference, 
                        P. Zemanek
                        Prague, 
                        November 16-17, 2007
                        107–120
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Romanello, M., Boschetti, F. & Crane, G.
                        2009
                         “Citations in the Digital Library of Classics:
                        Extracting Canonical References by Using Conditional Random Fields., ”  
                        Proceedings of the
                        2009 Workshop on Text and Citation Analysis for Scholarly Digital Libraries, 
                        Association for Computational Linguistics
                        Suntec City, Singapore
                        80–87
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Ruddy, D. & Rebillard, E.
                        2009
                         “Text Linking in the Humanities:
                        Citing Canonical Works Using OpenURL., ”  
                        September 11, 2009
                        
         (
link
)
    

                    
Shotton, D.
                        2010
                         “CiTO, the Citation Typing Ontology., ”  
                        Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 
                        1(Suppl 1)
                    S6
                        October 25, 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Smith, N.
                        2009
                         “Citation in Classical Studies., ”  
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        3(1)
                        March 15, 2009
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Unsworth, J.
                        2000
                         “Scholarly Primitives: what methods do humanities researchers have in common,
                        and how might our tools reflect this?, ”  
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
                
            
        