Introduction: A Welcome from the Stanford University Librarian

					Michael Keller, 
					Stanford University, 
					

				

					
Full Size Image 

				
				
Digital Humanists meeting at Stanford this month, whether present virtually or
					physically, are most welcome to our campus. Your host organization this year is
					Stanford University Libraries and Academic Information Resources, a long name
					for a complex and unique organization in higher education. SULAIR is a library,
					a cybrary, an academic computing organization, a publisher of scholarly
					monographs (Stanford University Press), and a provider of publishing services to
					about 140 scholarly journal publishers (HighWire Press), each specialty division
					supporting and informing the others in this mélange. 

				
We have supported digital humanities research and teaching numerous ways over the
					years through our digitization services, our academic technology specialist
					agents, our humanities curators, our digital archiving programs (LOCKSS and the
					Stanford Digital Repository), and our e-publishing services. We have found
					collaborators and fellow travelers along this route from the British Library,
					the Matthew Parker Library of Corpus Christi College of the University of
					Cambridge, the Bibliothèque nationale de France, the Bibliotheca Alexandrina,
					University of Virginia, University of Michigan, the University of Illinois at
					Urbana-Champaign, and the University of Alicante, among others. 

				
A fluff piece in American Libraries last year described SULAIR
					as a “juggernaut of innovation.” Perhaps we are, but our collective nose has
					been on the grindstone employing Blacklight to provide a richer OPAC, including
					virtual browsing of our classified collections and partnering with Google not
					just in the library digitization program, but as well in prototyping an
					innovative e-Thesis service integrating academic decisions on dissertations,
					easy workflows leading digital dissertations to our digital archive (the
					Stanford Digital Repository) and ultimately to Google for free indexing and
					access on a global basis. Matt Jockers and others in the SEASR team will report
					on the NLP research underway here and with several collaborating institutions.
					This recital could go on and on. 

				
We here use i.t. for prosaic purposes, getting unusual returns on investments in
					clever uses of technology in support of the usual library/cybrary functions. We
					use i.t. for innovative purposes, often resulting in open source tools and
					environments (Hydra and LOCKSS, for example). And we promote and support the use
					of i.t. in research and teaching (digital maps & GIS in numerous projects,
					and CourseWork, the local Sakai implementation, for example).

				
You are all most welcome here. Glen Worthey, chief of our 25-year-old Humanities
					Digital Information Service, and Matt Jockers, Academic Technology Specialist
					and leader of the SEASR project, are responsible for local arrangements for this
					meeting. We are excited as they are to have you here and look forward to
					learning from all of you.

				

					
Full Size Image 

				

				
 Michael A. Keller
 University Librarian
 Director of Academic
					Information Resources
 Founder/Publisher HighWire Press
 Publisher
					Stanford University Press

			
		