Poster: When WordHoard Met Pliny: Breaking Down of Interaction Silos Between
                    Applications

                    Bradley, John, 
                    Center for Computing in the Humanities, King's College London,
                        United Kingdom, 
                    
john.bradley@kcl.ac.uk

                

                    Hill, Timothy, 
                    Center for Computing in the Humanities, King's College London,
                    United Kingdom, 
                    
timothy.hill@kcl.ac.uk

                
One of the current issues within the Digital Humanities community is the wish to
                    break down “silos” between different applications, usually based on the
                    observation that it is difficult to bring two separately developed applications
                    together even on kinds of data that they might ideally actually share. Scholarly
                    annotation and notetaking has not been often been thought of as a kind of
                    “anti-siloing” activity, however, they do involve the juxtaposition of materials
                    and ideas from a broad range of different sources. In this context normal web
                    pages and digital applications act a bit like silos – working against the
                    ability, similar to what conventional notetaking provides, to juxtapose
                    materials from different places, and making it difficult for a computer user to
                    preserve those juxtapositions that are interesting.

                
In an attempt to recognise the central role of annotation and notetaking in
                    scholarship, there has been recent activity in the Digital Humanities (DH)
                    community to incorporate Web 2.0-like annotation services within a number of web
                    resources. We think this is, in fact, the wrong way to go, and it is our
                    contention that annotation, in fact, requires a significantly different
                    approach.

                
We can see the problem with this “adding an annotation service” approach if we
                    consider annotation on paper (see figure 1). When the book reader writes on the
                    page he combines on that piece of paper two rather different applications that
                    then must co-exist: the print media represented by the printed word and his/her
                    annotation shown by the handwritten note. The owner, the technology and purpose
                    of these two co-existing texts – the annotation and the print material – are
                    quite different. Furthermore, whereas the printed text represents an endpoint in
                    the “publishing application” that put it there, the hand-written annotation
                    represents the beginning of an act of interpretation that is likely to continue
                    into the future. In some senses, then, a printed page with an annotation on it
                    represents a nexus between these two quite different applications: the
                    presentation of the print, and the support for the annotation made by the
                    individual reader. The oddness, then, of the annotation-as-a-resource service in
                    a web resource is brought into clearer focus when we realise that if handwritten
                    annotation on a printed page worked in the way that an annotation service on a
                    website would operate , it would need to be a service of the book’s publisher –
                    something that would seem very peculiar, and, indeed perhaps strikingly
                    inappropriate.

                

                        
a printed page as the nexus between applications

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
Pliny (Pliny 2009), as initially installed supports annotation for web pages,
                    images and PDF documents. In each of these cases separate mini-applications (one
                    for each data type) supports, simultaneously, mechanisms to display the object
                    (web page, image or PDF) and to support annotation of these objects. Annotation
                    items, although appearing on the web or PDF page display are also objects that
                    work in the larger Pliny context as objects in their own right. Thus, like the
                    printed book, the Pliny screen becomes the nexus between the “display
                    application” of the web or PDF page and the separate-but-linked
                    “annotation/notetaking application”. Furthermore, the Eclipse platform (Eclipse
                    2010) on which Pliny operates already supports the dynamic addition of new
                    applications into an existing installation. Pliny could thus be relatively
                    straightforwardly extended to add support for annotation on other media such as
                    video or audio, and here again the integration between these media and Pliny
                    notes would be similar to that provided in base Pliny.

                
The purpose of this poster, however, moves on to a next step in the process
                    beyond the support of other digital media. Pliny is already equipped to support
                    annotation of relatively fixed objects such as PDF documents or digital movies.
                    The digital world, however, is not in fact restricted to the presentation of
                    relatively fixed media objects but extends to supporting user interaction with
                    dynamic applications which are less comfortably considered documents and more
                    likely to be thought of as tools. Thus, even in the confines of the WWW with its
                    strong document focus, DH work often explores how to stretch this document-focus
                    in the browser to deliver a tool to the user instead. Indeed, work as diverse as
                    TaPOR (2008) and PASE Domesday (2010) illustrate this straining at the
                    constraints that are imposed by the document orientation.

                
As a part of Pliny’s so-called “second agenda” (see Bradley 2007 and 2008), we
                    have also been interested in exploring the boundary between document and
                    application/tool in the context of annotation, and we are doing this work from
                    within the Eclipse plugin framework where application/tool building is, in fact,
                    an entirely natural thing. Furthermore, unlike other application building
                    frameworks, such as Java Swing, the plugin framework supports the kind of
                    intimate interaction and co-existence that annotation requires. In this way,
                    Pliny’s use of Eclipse’s plugin framework allows us to think of how to support
                    note-taking not only against fixed digital media, but also against the dynamic
                    results generated by digital tools.

                
Figure 2 shows the idea in a stylised form. Here we see the Pliny application
                    (shown here in green) co-existing with other applications. Two of them (Pliny’s
                    integrated Web browser, and Pliny’s PDF annotator) are shown here as orange
                    boxes presenting their particular digital media objects: a page in a web browser
                    (at the top), and two PDF documents. The annotations to these objects are
                    represented here as the little yellow boxes which, simultaneously, would
                    actually be visually integrated with their web or PDF pages, but are also owned
                    by Pliny. The Pliny user can also use these annotations in the Pliny application
                    as sources for ideas that inspire him/her to construct new concepts in his/her
                    interpretation of these materials. Pliny can represent these new concepts too,
                    and they are represented in the green Pliny application box as dark green boxes.
                    Thus, a Pliny item can appear both as an annotation on its media and also
                    simultaneously as a note participating in concepts that belong to an
                    interpretation that Pliny’s user is developing.

                

                        
Annotation as a kind of "glue" between applications

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
The “2
nd
 agenda” part of Pliny’s environment is shown by the
                    bottom two boxes placed on both sides of the green Pliny box. Here, the objects
                    being annotated don’t come from Pliny’s initial built-in applications supporting
                    Web pages and PDF files, but from two applications that have been added: a
                    Google maps annotation tool, and an implementation of WordHoard (WordHoard 2010)
                    which represents a more dynamic application than the other ones do. The user has
                    attached annotations to displays created by both these applications, and these
                    annotations, which represent observations the user has made while s/he uses
                    these tools, are Pliny objects (like those attached to the PDF pages) and can
                    therefore also participate in the work done by the user within Pliny. Just like
                    notes attached to PDF pages or web pages, notes attached to displays by Google
                    maps or Wordhoard can also contribute materials to the user’s growing
                    interpretation.

                
We chose to use the funds provided by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation’s MATC 2008
                    award to Pliny (which hereby we acknowledge with thanks!) as a way to fund a
                    serious exploring of this idea. With the cooperation of Martin Mueller and
                    others at Northwestern University we have been exploring what their WordHoard
                    tool (WordHoard 2010) would be like if it was presented in an intimately
                    linkable environment where Pliny operates rather than as a conventional Java
                    application in which it was originally conceived. You can see a result of this
                    kind of interaction through our WordHoard prototype in figure 3. Not only is a
                    note about the word “shamest” displayed attached to its occurrence in
                    Shakespeare’s Comedy of Errors, but there is also a reference to a WWW site that
                    has nothing to do with WordHoard, but that also contains the play’s text (with
                    the word spelled differently).

                

                        
WordHoard and Pliny operating as integrated applications

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
In conjunction with the work on WordHoard, we are also extending Pliny's code to
                    exploit Eclipse’s ability to allow the user to install a new plugin dynamically
                    from remote online repositories. When dynamic installation has been added in
                    Pliny. a user will be able to start with only basic Pliny, but at some point
                    when they need it be able to add into their environment, say, our WordHoard
                    application. We expect it will in the end be no more complex to do this in Pliny
                    than it is to, say, add Zotero to Firefox. At our poster session the visitor
                    will be able to see the Wordhoard integration with Pliny and with other
                    independently built tools that can interoperate in the Pliny environment. We
                    will illustrate what the experience is for the user to experience this kind of
                    integrated environment. For the development community we hope to speak about the
                    coding work that this represents and what lessons can be learned from our
                    experience.

            

        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Bradley, John
                        2007
                         “"Pliny: Making a contribution; Modularity, Integration and
                            Collaboration between Tools in Pliny." Peer reviewed poster., ” 
                        Digital Humanities Conference
                            2007, 
                        Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois., 
                        2007
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Bradley, John
                        2008
                         “"Playing together: modular tools and Pliny." Draft of
                            paper., ” 
                        Digital Humanities 2008, 
                        (University of Oulu, Finland, 
                        June 2008
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Eclipse homepage, 
                        2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        PASE Domesday, 
                        2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Pliny: A Note Manager, 
                        2009
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Text Analysis Portal for Research: TAPoR, 
                        2008
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        WordHoard: An application for the close reading and
                            scholarly analysis of deeply tagged texts, 
                        2010
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    


                
            
        