Paper: A User-Centered Digital Edition of Vuk Stefanović Karadžić's Lexicon Serbico-Germanico-Latinum
            

               Tasovac, Toma , 
               Center for Digtial Humanities (Belgrade, Serbia) , 
               
ttasovac@humanistika.org

            

               Ermolaev, Natalia , 
               Center for Digtial Humanities (Belgrade, Serbia) , 
               
ne99@columbia.edu

            
Dictionaries lie at the core of the human ability to conceptualize, systematize and
               convey meaning. But a dictionary (both print and digital) is many things at once: a
               text, a tool, a model of language, and a cultural object deeply embedded in the
               historical moment of its production (Tasovac, 2010). While it is true that we now
               live in the age of the electronic dictionary (de Schryver, 2003), dictionaries have
               always played an important role in the interplay between production technology and
               knowledge taxonomies (McArthur, 1986; Hüllen and Schulze, 1988; Hüllen, 1999). In
               this respect, historical dictionaries remain particularly valuable objects of study
               because they illustrate sociolinguistic perceptions and reveal culturally shaded
               conceptualizations of lexical knowledge of a particular epoch — often in stark
               contrast to our contemporary attitudes and values. Moreover, they pose a veritable
               challange for text encoding, semantic markup and database modeling (Fomin and Toner,
               2006; Nyhan, 2006; Nyhan, 2008; Mooijaart and van der Wal, 2009; Lemnitzer et al.,
               2010). This is why all dictionaries, including retrodigitized historical
               dictionaries, are important for digital humanities, and why DH — with its concern for
               (abstract) modeling of knowledge and its (practical) implementations in humanities
               research — can integrate and propel different trains of lexicographic and
               metalexicographic thought at the intersection of language and technology. 


            
Many DH research projects have aimed to produce electronic editions of printed
               lexicons (see for instance Morrissey, 1993; Lemberg et al., 1998; Christmann, 2001;
               Fournier, 2001). In such efforts, retrodigitization is usually based on one of two
               approaches: either the production of “faithful“ digital copies (at the cost of
               reproducing factual or typographic errors), or the structural modelling of the
               content, which treats the print edition as a data source, rather than as an immutable
               text to be reproduced in its entirety (Lobenstein-Reichmann, 2008). In either case,
               retrodigitization projects tend not to involve any degree of re-editing or expanding
               the actual content of historical dictionaries. 


            
We agree with Kirkness (2008) that digitalizing historical dictionaries can increase
               and optimize their use value, especially in global, networked environments. But we
               also feel that one central aspect is often overlooked in current studies of
               retrodigitized dictionaries: users interacting with a historic lexicon do no longer
               necessarily have active command of the text's primary language. Even when historical
               dictionaries are retrodigitized with the user's needs in mind, the focus is usually
               on easy-to-handle navigation, presentation layout and retrieval of elements from a
               full-text search (Christmann, 2003); or on uniformization of existing data elements,
               such as dates (Kinable, 2006). While these efforts are worthwhile and necessary
               because they contribute greatly to editions that are more usable and eﬃcient than
               their hardcopy counterparts, electronic dictionaries remain in essence lookup tools
               (for words encountered in a given text) rather than exploratory tools (for unknown
               words or concepts). This, we believe, can reduce both their scholarly and popular
               appeal. 


            
It may seem unlikely at ﬁrst that historical dictionaries can generate non-academic
               interest, but experience has shown that there is a broad audience outside highly
               professionalized linguistic circles that is both curious and enthusiastic about
               exploring the historic and ethnographic fabric of a language (Kirkness, 2008). In our
               own web-project — “Reklakaza.la” (Serbian for “hearsay”) — we have been publishing
               online selected entries from the classic, 19th-century Serbian Dictionary by Vuk
               Stefanović Karadžić and linking them via social networks Twitter (http://twitter.com/
               Vuk_Karadzic) and Facebook (http://facebook.com/reklakaza.la). The project has gained
               more than 24,000 fans on Facebook alone, becoming a platform for bringing meaningful
               humanities inquiry into the public conversation, fostering the sense of community,
               sharing, and mutual learning that proves the relevance of the humanities in today's
               world despite academic budget cuts and declining job opportunities. 


            
The success of our pilot project has strengthened our conviction that a modern,
               electronic edition of Karadžić's dictionary is long overdue. Vuk Stefanović Karadžić
               (1787-1864), the linguist, folklorist and reformer of the Serbian language, published
               his landmark Srpski rječnik, istumačen njemačkijem i latinskijem
                  riječima — Lexicon Serbico-Germanico-Latinum in two
               editions (1818 and 1852). This ﬁrst lexicon of the modern Serbian vernacular, rather
               than the Church-Slavic hybrid language used by the educated elites up to the 19th
               century, has a unique place in the history of not only the Serbian language, but the
               South Slavic diasystem in general (Дмитриев and Сафронов, 1984; Wilson, 1986;
               Стојановић, 1987; Eschker, 1988; Potthoff, 1990; Ивић, 1990; Vitalich, 2005;
               Кулаковский, 2005). The text is rich with ethnographic and anthropological material.
               Not only do many entries contain examples of Balkan folk storytelling, but some are
               themselves structured as historical, cultural and ethnographic narratives that offer
               informative sketches and sometimes even very detailed accounts of the myths and
               realities of the Balkan past (see, for instance, entries for кмет, отмица, мора,
               хајдук, etc.). 


            
Though it was republished twice (in 1898 and 1935), the Lexicon has not been reprinted since (other than in facsimile editions).
               Meeting the needs of modern-day users, however, presents a host of editorial
               challenges. The entries in the Lexicon are written mainly in a
               dialect which is on the margins of contemporary standard Serbian. Thus, the
               lexicographic material is not always entirely understood by contemporary speakers,
               and can often appear obscure or unwieldy. It is hard for the average user to answer
               questions such as: what was the early 19th-century equivalent of a mod-ern-day
               Serbian word? What household objects, for instance, are listed in Karadžić‘s
               dictionary? What words were difficult or impossible for Karadžić to translate into
               German or Latin? 


            
Our “Annotated Digital Edition of Vuk Stefanović Karadžić’s Srpski
                  rječnik” is therefore conceived as a resource that caters to access needs and
               habits of modern scholars, teachers, students, and, last but not least, general
               readers. The entries are marked up XML, in compliance with the Guidelines of the Text
               Encoding Initiative (Burnard et al., 2006). In this, initial phase of the project, we
               are focusing solely on text encoding, but in view of the potential use in a data-base
               driven web-application at a later stage. 


            
In addition to marking up existing structural elements of a dictionary entry (such as
               lemma, part of speech, senses, deﬁnitions, translation equivalents, examples etc.),
               our work supplies important additional information that will enhance the modern-day
               user's interaction with the dictionary, including: 
                  
standard Serbian equivalents to dialect word forms (e.g. бичевање vs.
                     бичкарење, мешина vs. мљешина, енглески vs. инглешки); 


                  
Serbian ekavian word-forms to both standard and east-Herzegovina jekavian
                     entries (e.g. терати vs. тјерати, терати vs. ћерати); 


                  
both the original 19th-century accentuation (e.g. кòчија̑шки) and its
                     modern-day graphic equivalent (кòчија̄шкӣ); 


                  
indications when modern-day accentuation differs from the from found in the
                        Lexicon (e.g. мо̑ре vs. мо̏ре, das Meer, mare); 


                  
an extension of the extant cross-reference system through linking synonymous
                     and near-synonymous entries that have been overlooked by previous editors (e.g.
                     жаба and напнигуша; обрљуга and неопера). 


                  
labeling of Turkisms overlooked by previous editors (e.g. була, инћар,
                     џукела); 


                  
marking up persons, places and dates for easy indexing and analysis; 


                  
indications of word usage (eg. ист. and ист. кр. as <usage
                        type="geo">East</usg> for better statistical analysis and
                     possible further processing and creation of geo-spatial word maps etc.); 


                  
marking up instances where Karadžić uses a ﬁrst-person narrative to explain
                     an entry; 


                  
indications of the edition in which entries appeared for the ﬁrst time, etc. 


               
            

            
Furthermore, we are assigning semantic domain labels to word senses in accordance
               with Magnini and Cavaglia, 2000; Bentivogli et al., 2004, cross-referencing senses
               with the Transpoetika Dictionary — a bilingualized, Wordnet-based Serbian-English
               dictionary (Tasovac, 2009), and providing English glosses in addition to the existing
               German and Latin. All of this will help us meet our goal of moving beyond the current
               paradigm of limiting retrodigital text editing to the creation of electronic replicas
               of hardcopy lexicons or semantically structured electronic representations of the
               original data source. We are interested in hybrid approaches that respect the
               integrity of the original text, but also take advantage of the digital medium to
               create modern, deeply-encoded, user-centered editions of historical dictionaries,
               which can not only provide look-up mechanisms for particular words, but also function
               as exploratory tools for various types of knowledge discovery. 


            
Some practical advantages of our edition of Vuk Karadžić's dictionary will include
               reverse look-ups, allowing a user to search an English, German, or Latin word and ﬁnd
               its Serbian equivalent in the Lexicon. The domain labels will provide researchers
               with valuable and, for the ﬁrst time, measurable information about the clusters of
               paradigmatically related terms, as well as the extent of domain ambiguity and domain
               variability. Users will be able to treat semantic domains as thematic entry points
               into the dictionary, looking up, for instance, all entries that belong to AGRICULTURE, FOLKLORE, HISTORY or GASTRONOMY; while our logically and
               semantically consistent markup of Karadžić's own usage notes will make it possible
               for users to easily explore regional and dialectological distribution of entries in
               the Lexicon, offering a basis for subsequent work that could
               involve data visualization, statistical analysis, text mining etc. 


         
      
References:

         
            
               
Bentivogli, L
                  P Forner
                  B Magnini
                  E Pianta
                  2004
                   “Revising the Wordnet Domains Hierarchy: Semantics, Coverage and
                     Balancing, ” 
                  Proceedings of the Workshop on Multilingual Linguistic
                     Resources, 
                  101-108


               
Burnard, Lou
                  Katherine O’Brien
                  John Unsworth
                  2006
                  Electronic Textual Editing, New York
                  The Modern Language Association of America


               
Christmann, R
                  2001
                   “Books into bytes: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm’s Deutsches Worterbuch
                     on CDROM and on the Internet, ” 
                  Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                  16
                  no. 2
                  121-133


               
Christmann, R2003 “Towards the
                     User: The Digital Edition of the Deutsche Worterbuch by Jacob and Wilhelm
                     Grimm, ” Literary and linguistic computing, 
                  181:
                     11-22. 


               
de Schryver, Gilles-Maurice2003 “Lexicographer’s Dreams in the Electronic-Dictionary Age, ” . International Journal of Lexicography, 
                  162:
                     143-199


               
Eschker, Wolfgang, ed.
                  1988Jacob Grimm und Vuk Karadžić: Zeugnisse einer
                     Gelehrtenfreundschaft, Volkskundliche
                     Schriften, Bd. 4
                  KasselE. Röth-Verlag


               
Fomin, Maxim
                  Gregory Toner. 2006
                   “Digitizing a Dictionary of Medieval Irish: the eDIL
                     Project, ” 
                  Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                  21
                  1
                  83
               


               
Fournier, Johannes
                  2001.  “New directions in Middle High German
                     lexicography: dictionaries interlinked electronically, ” 
                  Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                  16
                  no. 1
                  99-111
               


               
Hüllen, Werner
                  1999
                  English Dictionaries, 800-1700: The Topical Tradition, 
                  Oxford [England] New York
                  Clarendon Press Oxford University Press
               


               
Hüllen, Werner
                  Rainer Schulze. 1988
                  Understanding the Lexicon: Meaning, Sense, and World Knowledge In
                     Lexical Semantics, 
                  Tübingen
                  M. Niemeyer
               


               
Kinable, Dirk
                  2006.  “Computerized Restoration of Historical
                     Dictionaries: Uniformization and Date-assigning in Dictionary Quotations of the
                     Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal, ” 
                  Literary and Linguistic Computing
                  21
                  no. 3
                  295-310
               


               
Kirkness, Alan
                  2008
                   “Digitalisierung -Vernetzung -Europäisierung: Zur Zukunft der
                     historischen Lexikographie des Deutschen, ” 
                  Lexicographica, 
                  2007
                  7-38
               


               
Lemberg, I
                  S Petzold
                  H Speer
                  1998
                   “Der Weg des Deutschen Rechtswörterbuchs in das Internet, ” 
                  Wörterbücher in der Diskussion III. Vorträge aus dem Heidelberger
                     Lexikographischen Kolloquium,, 
                  Tübingen
                  Niemeyer
                  262-284
               


               
Lemnitzer, Lothar
                  Laurent Romary
                  Andreas Witt
                  2010
                   “Representing Human and Machine Dictionaries in Markup languages
                     (SGML, XML), ” 
         (
link
)
   
               


               
Lobenstein-Reichmann, Anja
                  2008
                   “Allgemeine Überlegungen zur Retrodigitalisierung historischer
                     Wörterbücher des Deutschen, ” 
                  Lexicographica, 
                  2007
                  173-198
               


               
Magnini, B
                  G Cavaglia. 2000
                   “Integrating Subject Field Codes into WordNet, ” 
                  Proceedings of LREC-2000, Second International Conference on
                     Language Resources and Evaluation, 
                  1413-1418
               


               
McArthur, T. B.
                  1986
                   “Thematic Lexicography, ” 
                  The History of Lexicography: Papers from the Dictionary Research
                     Centre Seminar at Exeter, March 1986, 
                  R. R. K Hartmann
                  40
                  Amsterdam; Philadelphia
                  J. Benjamins


               
Mooijaart, Marijke
                  Marijke van der Wal
                  2009
                  Yesterday’s Words: Contemporary, Current and Future
                     Lexicography, 
                  Historiographia Linguistica, 
                  Newcastle
                  Cambridge Scholars Publishing
               


               
Morrissey, Robert
                  1993
                   “Texts and Contexts: The ARTFL Database in French Studies, ” 
                  Profession, 
                  27-33
               


               
Nyhan, Julianne
                  2006.  “The Application of XML to the historical
                     lexicography of Old, Middle, and Early-Modern Irish: a Lexicon based
                     analysis, ” 
                  National University of Ireland
                  Cork


               
Nyhan, Julianne2008 “Developing
                     Integrated Editions of Minority Language Dictionaries: The Irish
                     Example, ” Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                  231:
                     3-12
               


               
Potthoff, Wilfried
                  1990Vuk Karadžić im europäischen Kontext, 
                  Beiträge des internationalen wissenschaftlichen Symposiums der
                     Vuk-Karadzic-Jacob-Grimm-Gesellschaft am 19. und 20. November 1987, 
                  HeidelbergCarl Winter
                     Universitätsverlag


               
Tasovac, Toma
                  2010
                   “Reimagining the Dictionary, or Why Lexicography Needs Digital
                     Humanities, ” 
                  Digital Humanities 2010, 
                  
         (
link
)
   


               
Tasovac, Toma
                  2009
                  More or Less Than a Dictionary? Wordnet as a Model for Serbian L2
                     Lexicography
                  Infotheca: Journal of Informatics and Librarinaship, 
                  10
                  no. 1-2
                  13a-22a


               
Vitalich, Kristin Leigh
                  2005
                   “Lexicographical doxa: The writing of Slavic dictionaries in the
                     nineteenth century (Samuel Bogumil Linde, Vuk Stefanović Karadžić, Vladimir
                     Ivanovich Dal), ” University of California at Los
                     Angeles


               
Wilson, D1986The life and times
                     of Vuk Stefanović Karadžić, 1787-1864: Literacy, Literature, and National
                     Independence in Serbia, Oxford
                  Clarendon Press


               
Дмитриев, Петр Андреевич
                  Герман Иванович Сафронов1984Вук С.
                     Караджич и его реформа сербскохорватского/хорватосербского литературного языка.
                     Учеб.
                  пособие, ЛенинградЛГУ


               
Ивић, Милка
                  1990О jезику Вуковом и
                     вуковском, Нови СадКњиж. заjедница Новог
                     Сада


               
Кулаковский, Платон Андреевич
                  2005Вук Караджич. Его деятельность и значение в
                     сербской
                     литературе, МоскваУРСС


               
Стојановић, Љубомир1987Живот и
                     рад Вука Стеф. Караџића, Београд
                  Београдски издавачко-графички завод


            
         
      