Poster: Digital Collections at Duke University Libraries

                     Aery, Sean , 
                    
sean.aery@duke.edu

                    Duke University, 
                

                    Sexton, Will, 
                    
will.sexton@duke.edu

                    Duke University, 
                
The digitization of primary sources for humanities research marks one of the
                    important ways that the emergence of a digital culture has transformed
                    libraries, special collections, and other cultural heritage organizations. The
                    last fifteen years have seen a wide range of initiatives among both small and
                    large organizations to expose unique artifacts, including manuscripts, still
                    photographs, film, audio and print. The practice of digitizing primary sources
                    has come to be known in the vernacular of the library profession as “digital
                    collections.”

                
Staff at Duke University Libraries have collaborated during the last part of 2010
                    on re-imagining, re-engineering and re-implementing the web application by which
                    the library provides discovery and access for its digital collections. Our work
                    plan targets January of 2011 as a release date for the remade interface. As part
                    of an outreach effort to the research and education communities that comprise
                    the target audience for this application, we propose a poster and demo
                    presentation at Digital Humanities ‘11.

                
For the development team at Duke, the project has presented an opportunity to
                    think in depth about the landscape in which we publish our digital collections.
                    The application that we seek to replace went live in January 2008, after an
                    in-house development process that was expedited to head off the decommissioning
                    of hardware. Since that time, we have considered how a more measured development
                    process might enable us to upgrade the user experience.

                
We went through a lengthy process of gathering feedback from users and
                    stakeholders of the existing digital collections site. We analyzed other
                    libraries’ digital collections efforts, content-focused sites like Flickr and
                    Youtube, and retail sites like Netflix, Amazon and Zappos. We also gave
                    considerable thought to the ways that open API’s, social networking and concepts
                    such as linked data transform the ways that students, instructors and
                    researchers experience online resources.

                
Project manager Sean Aery has written extensively about the project and included
                    many screenshots of the new page design on the library’s Digital Collections
                    Blog. His postings outline the research-heavy approach that we took in
                    developing the interface design. In addition, we have worked to incorporate
                    linked data concepts into the underlying representation of collections metadata.
                    One of the objectives for this project is to develop an open API for the
                    collections, to foster the development of applications by interested users.
                    Presenting the framework to digital humanities scholars will prove invaluable in
                    meeting this last objective. [See the
                    http://library.duke.edu/blogs/digital-collections/category/website-redesign/].

                
One of the key decisions in our process was the choice to decouple the digital
                    collections interface from other elements of our digital collections
                    infrastructure. The application is a standalone framework developed in the
                    Django platform, with Solr to provide the faceted searching functionality, and a
                    mechanism for synchronizing data from other components. The decoupling of this
                    application from tools for developing and managing content allows the
                    development team to work in short, iterative cycles, free from dependencies on
                    other aspects of the program’s technology infrastructure.
                        
A significant selection of advertising-related materials from one of
                            Duke’s collection centers, the John W. Hartman Center for Sales,
                            Advertising and Marketing History.

                        
Important documentary photography collections such as the Sidney D.
                            Gamble Photographs of early-twentieth-century China.

                        
Many rare books not available in other venues.

                    
                
Finally, and critically, all of these processes, decisions and source code
                    updates have come in the service of a great body of important and compelling
                    content for humanities researchers. Much of the material is housed in Duke’s
                    Rare Book, Manuscript and Special Collections Library, one of the world’s
                    leading libraries of its kind. Digitized collections include:

                
Duke has a very active Digital Production Center, and we plan to publish a wide
                    variety of new and compelling materials in the first quarter of the new year.
                    All of the content is freely available for educators, students and
                    researchers.

                
Our process of learning from our users and patrons does not end with the release
                    of the new platform. We want to learn about ways we can improve the quality of
                    the collections and the experience. Our goal is to make the digital collections
                    a premier resource for research and learning in the humanities and social
                    sciences. Digital humanities scholars comprise one of our important target
                    audiences, and the DH11 conference provides us an important opportunity to
                    engage in the discussion around this field of study.


            
        