Poster: Toward a Digital Research Environment for Buddhist Studies

					Nagasaki, Kiyonori , 
					International Institute for Digital Humanities, 
					
nagasaki@dhii.jp

				

					Tomabechi, Toru, 
					International Institute for Digital Humanities, 
					
tomabechi@dhii.jp

				

					Shimoda, Masahiro, 
					University of Tokyo, 
					
shimoda@l.u-tokyo.ac.jp

				
 In recent times, digital resources have taken on steadily greater importance in
					the field of Buddhist studies, with increasing numbers of digitized versions of
					Buddhist canonical texts, representation of material culture, and other objects
					of research becoming available on Web. However, despite the basic availability
					of such resources, most of them are not set up in an optimal way for usage by
					researchers; nor are they for the most part integrated with each other. For
					example, there does not yet exist a system that can operate with equal efficacy
					with philological data related to Sanskrit, Chinese, Tibetan language materials.
					Therefore, a comprehensive and concrete framework is needed. Although a method
					of text description is fairly well established in the form of TEI P5, neither
					the interfaces, nor the methods of presentation of results for digitized works
					are as yet satisfactory for the scholars of Buddhism. In this paper, we will
					present our approach to the establishment of requirements for various kinds of
					materials used in Buddhist studies and make some suggestions for the
					implementation of more functional interfaces as a Web research environment for
					such scholars.

				
 At first, it must be noted that it is very difficult to define adequate
					requirements for the full range of the scholars of Buddhism, who come from a
					broad array of language training and methodological approaches. Thus, this paper
					will focus primarily on the fulfillment of the requirements for the scholars who
					are dealing with authentic scholarly digitized texts. In the field of Buddhist
					studies, where texts have been translated across a number of languages in
					different regions at various points in history, we have no recourse but to deal
					with several versions of a text, including transmitted, diffused, and translated
					variations at the same time (Fig.1). 
					
					

						
(Fig. 1. An Example: “ मूलमध्यमककारिका (Madhyamakakārikā)" and some of the
							related texts)

						
Full Size Image 

					
					
					As discussed by Steinkellner (1988), it is
					often difficult to "recover" the original form of any given text, as they have
					been changed variously in their long tradition. In many cases, all that has come
					down to us is a translation that was preserved in the Chinese tradition since
					the 2nd century or in the Tibetan tradition since the 8th century. It is quite
					often the case that various witnesses are extant in both traditions. In such
					cases, various diplomatic texts in various languages must be compared in various
					units such as at the level of text, chapter, fascicle, sentence, word, syllable,
					or even character. Therefore, it is necessary for textual scholars to prepare an
					environment that delivers integrated views of a given text views. On the other
					hand, it is important to understand the background thought and beliefs reflected
					in each stage of the textual development—not only in Sanskrit and Pāli which are
					the closest to the original form—but also in Tibetan, Chinese. In this case,
					each annotation must be recorded in the context of its diffusion into other
					texts. In addition, modern translations of each text should be pointed to from
					such texts. Therefore, it is crucial for Buddhist textual studies to provide
					such information within a system of intertextual relationships. (See Fig. 1)
				
 In order to realize such relationship in digitized resources, it is necessary to
					provide the data in a punctuation-neutral manner. This is because separation of
					words or sentences is not always obvious; punctuating text itself amounts to an
					independent and original scholarly contribution, especially in the cases of
					Sanskrit and classical Chinese manuscripts. Therefore, the basic concepts are: 

				
					
being based on a unit that is not restricted to the legacy media.

					
inheritance of the legacy studies on the paper media.

					
DB providers prepare the space for the sharing of data units.

					
the users act as recipients of the units and some of them act as
						distributors of the units.

					
DB providers develop and distribute their own Web API so that users can
						make arbitrary links to access each others' data. 

					
The above are realized as a collaborative research environment on the
						Web.

				
				
In addition, in order to preserve compatibility with past research results, all
					units should be identifiable in legacy media through traditional referencing
					methods such as T0001,01,0001a01 which means Taishō
						Daizōkyō, vol.1, page 1, register a (among a, b, and c), line 1. Then,
					they should be located by URI by implementation of Web API so that the other
					persons or applications can freely refer to arbitrary units through Web.

				
 In order to realize such concepts, a collaborative editing system needs to be
					developed. Initially, users should be registered according to their own roles
					such as visitor, editor, or administrative editor. The role of the editor is
					that of inputting and checking of the data; the role of administrative editor is
					checking of the data and the determination of the distribution of the data. Both
					editor and administrative editor should be able to efficiently select arbitrary
					units with an easy method such as mouse click or drag on the text body without
					any restriction posed by the textual structure. Then they can append any
					necessary information to the units and link selected units to other ones (Fig.
					2). 

						
(Fig. 2. The procedures of inputting relationship data on an
							environment)

						
Full Size Image 

					
					In the final step, the administrative editor should check and determine
					whether each unit is ready for release. The role of visitor is only to browse
					the workspace to observe the progress of the work. On the other hand, anonymous
					users can browse only released data. They can efficiently view various
					information with various methods such as mouse click or drag on the text body
					and select (or ignore) any data on the basis of various properties such as their
					sources, contributors, and so on. In order to realize such a function on Web,
					AJAX will be fully utilized.
				
 Finally, we will explain the Web Database function. The Web Database stores only
					relational data that includes one or two locations in the original materials,
					its annotation or relationship information, contributor's name, data composition
					and other related information. The writing rule of the location allows the user
					to use the information even without digitized textual material. However, if the
					material is originally in digitized form, the data must refer to a logical
					location such as the URI. Users don't need to be aware of separation between the
					database and the materials presented to them because to the viewer of the
					materials, they seem to be seamlessly integrated with the database. By this kind
					of method, it will be easier to integrate the other materials which are released
					on other Web sites into the environment. The database can provide arbitrary data
					according to the user's preference through Web API, as well as retrieve and show
					the data provided by other DBs. From here, the data can be published under
					various formats such as RDF. However, in principle, this kind of system would
					not be able to avoid the problem of overlap if there is an intent to publish its
					data fully including the original materials. So we are trying to do so according
					to TEI P5 by using a kind of stand-off markup. 
					

						
(Fig. 3. The procedures of browsing the relational data on an
							environment)

						
Full Size Image 

					
				
				
 Although we have just begun to develop this approach, it has already been tested
					by some scholars and we have seen positive results. Actually, these early
					testers say that it is very useful for them because their accessibility and
					permissions are limited and explicitly shown. However, some enhancements have
					been suggested, which mainly concern the function of browsing. We will work on
					this until the time of DH2011, when we will able to present a much more matured
					system.

			

		
References:

			
				
					

						Burnard, L.  Bauman, S.
						2007
						P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
							Interchange, 
						
         (
link
)
   
					

					

						Caton, P.
						2007
						 “Distributed Multivalent Encoding, ” 
						Digital Humanities 2007, 
						University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 
						2-8 June, 2007
						33-34
					

					

						DeRose, S.
						2004
						 “Overlap: A Review and a Horse, ” 
						Extreme Markup Languages 2004, 
						Montreal, 
						2-6 Aug., 2004
						
         (
link
)
   
					

					

						Lavagnino, J.
						2009
						 “Access, ” 
						Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
						24 (1)
						63-76
					

					

						Nagasaki, K.
						2008
						 “A Collaboration System for the Philology of the Buddhist
							Study , ” 
						Digital Humanities 2008, 
						Oulu, Finland, 
						25-29 June, 2008
						262-263
					

					

						Rehm, G.  Witt, A.
						2008
						 “Aspects of Sustainability in Digital Humanities , ” 
						Digital Humanities 2008, 
						Oulu, Finland, 
						25-29 June, 2008
						21-29
					

					

						Renear, A. H.
						2004
						 “Text Encoding, ” 
						A Companion to Digital Humanities, 
						Schreibman, S. Siemens, R. Unsworth, J.
						Blackwell
						Oxford
						218-239
					

					

						Steinkellner, E.
						1988
						 “Methodological Remarks On The Constitution Of Sanskrit
							Texts From The Buddhist Pramāṇa-Tradition, ” 
						Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, Band
							XXXII, 
						103-129
					

				
			
		