Poster: Improving the AAC-FACKEL, a Scholarly Digital Edition of the Satirical
                    Journal "Die Fackel"

                    Biber, Hanno, 
                    Institute for Corpus Linguistics and Text Technology, Austrian
                        Academy of Sciences,Vienna, Austria, 
                    
hanno.biber@oeaw.ac.at

                
In the following a presentation of the latest developments to improve an existing
                    scholarly digital edition will be given. The scholarly edition in question is
                    the AAC-FACKEL, the digital edition of the historical literary journal "Die
                    Fackel". The presentation will be devided into three parts representing three
                    consistent steps in the development. First, the general principles and the
                    specific edition and design considerations concerning the online publication of
                    the AAC-FACKEL will be presented. Second, the particular questions of editing
                    and exploring this important and interesting source of literary history of the
                    German language by means of a sophisticated research tool will be addressed.
                    Third, a plan and the considerations for improvement of this successful and
                    widely used online edition, which is based upon the principles of corpus
                    research and text technology, will be presented. The digital edition of the
                    historical literary journal "Die Fackel" ("The Torch") has been developed in a
                    collaboration of researchers, programmers and designers within the framework of
                    the AAC-Austrian Academy Corpus which is operated by the Institute for Corpus
                    Linguistics and Text Technology at the Austrian Academy of Sciences in Vienna.
                    "Die Fackel" was originally published and almost entirely written by the
                    satirist and language critic Karl Kraus in Vienna from 1899 until 1936. The
                    AAC-FACKEL is online since January 2007 and offers free online access to its 37
                    volumes, 415 issues, 922 numbers, comprising more than 22.500 pages and 6
                    million tokens. The digital edition contains a fully searchable database of the
                    journal with various indexes, search tools and navigation aids in an innovative
                    and functional graphic design interface, where all pages of the original are
                    available as digital texts and as facsimile images, which is one important
                    principle of the AAC’s resources and publication initiatives. The work of Karl
                    Kraus can be regarded as one of the most important contributions to world
                    literature. It is a source for the history of the time, for its language and its
                    moral transgressions. Karl Kraus covers in his typical and idiosyncratic style
                    in thousands of texts the themes of journalism and war, of politics and
                    corruption, of literature and lying. The interface provides the scholar with a
                    complex research environment to read, study and access the texts from various
                    entry points. The journal comprises a great variety of essays, notes,
                    commentaries, aphorisms, poems and other forms. The scholarly digital edition
                    allows new ways of philological research and analysis. The presentation of this
                    resource, where the question of how a valuable historical text source is made
                    visible and alive in a digital media environment is addressed, gives insights
                    into the features of the edition, where the potential of lexicographic word
                    searches within the various texts of the edition as well as basic and more
                    advanced elements of the corpus research approach followed by the AAC is
                    demonstrated. The research tool offers access to this resource by means of a
                    multifunctional interface. The interface has five individual frames synchronized
                    within one single window. The frames can be opened and closed as required. The
                    'Paratext' section situated within the first frame provides additional
                    information about the background of the edition and scholarly essays about the
                    journal. The 'Search|Index' section gives access to a variety of indexes,
                    databases and full-text search mechanisms. The results of these queries and
                    lists are displayed in the adjacent 'Results' section. A sophisticated
                    'Contents' section has been developed in order to show the reader the whole
                    range of the journal ready to be explored and give access to the whole run of
                    issues and all of the contents of the journal in chronological order. The 'text'
                    section has a complex and powerful navigational bar at the top so that the
                    reader can easily navigate and read within the journal either in text-mode or in
                    image-mode from page to page, from text to text (soon to be implemented), from
                    issue to issue, and with the help of hyperlinks. The text can be searched in the
                    following four modes: in full text search mode, by means of a list of word forms
                    and of an inverted list of word forms. The functionality of the indexes and the
                    technical specifications of the edition are described in the 'Paratext' section
                    on the technical details. The following indexes are in preparation: an index of
                    titles including all texts of the entire journal; an index of errors that were
                    corrected by Karl Kraus in "Die Fackel"; an index of errors that were not
                    corrected by Karl Kraus but found and provided with suggested readings by the
                    editors; an index of variants of Fackel issues, including the later editions,
                    all confiscated issues and censored passages as well as the various regional
                    editions of "Die Fackel"; an index of inserts including all regular inserts that
                    are considered as part of the text of "Die Fackel" together with other inserts,
                    which were added on occasion, as well as additions; an index of illustrations;
                    an index of special issues; and an index of extra editions, including separately
                    reprinted articles from "Die Fackel"; finally, an extensive and complete index
                    of names mentioned in "Die Fackel", together with philologically sampled
                    additional data, is in preparation and will consist of personal names, based
                    upon the material collected by Franz Ögg, but corrected and largely extended, as
                    well as indexes of fictitious names, institutions, periodicals, and works of
                    literature, works of art and so on. The contents list of this edition is based
                    on the original text titles given by Karl Kraus in "Die Fackel" and in the
                    separate contents pages of the quarterly volumes of the journal, which were
                    collected by the editors of the AAC-FACKEL. The corpus based research
                    possibilities offered by this digital edition and its underlying principles will
                    be dealt with in this presentation. The corpus research unit at the Institute
                    for Corpus Linguistics and Text Technology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
                    is concerned with establishing and exploring large electronic text corpora and
                    with conducting scholarly research in the field of corpora and digital editions.
                    Among the sources collected by the AAC, which systematically covers various
                    domains, genres and types, are more than 500 million running words of
                    newspapers, literary journals, novels, dramas, poems, advertisements, essays on
                    various subjects, travel literature, cookbooks, pamphlets, political speeches as
                    well as a variety of scientific, legal, and religious texts, to name just a few
                    forms. The specific principles of the digital editions are determined by the
                    conviction that the methods of corpus research lead to valuable resources for
                    scholars. The AAC has developed model editions to meet these aims, which provide
                    well structured and well designed access to the sources, and will continue to do
                    so by improving existing editions, thereby contributing to the development of
                    digital resources for research into language and literature.

            

        