Tutorial: Network and Topical Analysis for the Humanities using NWB and Sci2

					Weingart, Scott, 
					Indiana University, 
					
scbweing@indiana.edu

				

					Börner, Katy, 
					Indiana University, 
					
katy@indiana.edu

				

					Duhon, Russell, 
					Indiana University, 
					
rduhon@indiana.edu

				

					Linnemeier, Micah, 
					Indiana University, 
					
mwlinnem@indiana.edu

				

					Phillips, Patrick, 
					Indiana University, 
					
pataphil@gmail.com

				

					Biberstine, Joseph, 
					Indiana University, 
					
jrbibers@indiana.edu

				

					Tank, Chintan, 
					Indiana University, 
					
tankchintan@gmail.com

				

					Kong, Chin Hua, 
					Indiana University, 
					
kongch@indiana.edu

				
Abstract

				
More and more, research in the humanities requires making use and sense of
					datasets that represent the structure and dynamics of complex natural and
					man-made systems. Recent trends in the digital humanities have resulted in the
					wide-scale availability of this data. The analysis, navigation, and management
					of these large-scale, dynamically changing datasets requires a new kind of tool,
					a macroscope (from macro, great, and skopein, to observe).


				
Microscopes empowered our naked eyes to see cells, microbes, and viruses, thereby
					advancing the progress of biology and medicine. Telescopes opened our minds to
					the immensity of the cosmos and prepared mankind for the conquest of space.
					Macroscopes promise to help us cope with another infinite: the infinitely
					complex. They allow us to detect patterns, trends, and outliers, give access to
					details, present a ‘vision of the whole,’ and assist our ‘synthesis’ of what we
					observe. While most microscopes and telescopes are static physical instruments,
					macroscopes are continuously changing bundles of software deployed as
					cyberinfrastructures, Web services, or standalone tools.


				
This tutorial presents and demonstrates CIShell powered tools such as the Science
					of Science (Sci2) Tool (
http://sci.slis.indiana.edu/sci2
) and the Network
					Workbench (NWB) Tool (
http://nwb.slis.indiana.edu
). The NWB Tools is a network analysis,
					modeling, and visualization toolkit for physics, biomedical, social science, and
					other multidisciplinary research. The Sci2 Tool was specifically designed for
					researchers and science policy makers interested to study and understand the
					structure and dynamics of science. These versatile tools can be utilized for
					humanities data, allowing humanists to explore topical or social networks within
					their areas of study. They will be utilized for the analysis of temporal,
					geospatial, topic, and network datasets, and the professional visualization of
					analysis results by means of large-format charts and maps. Both tools are
					standalone desktop applications that install and run on Windows, Linux x86 and
					Mac OSX.

			
			
				
Outline

				
15 Min.Marcoscope Design and Usage

				
45 Min. Sci2 Tool Basics 
						
Download and run the tool.

						
Load and clean a dataset using the Sci2 Database; process raw data
							into networks.

						
Find basic statistics and run various algorithms over the
							network.

						
Visualize the networks as either a graph or a circular
							hierarchy.

					
				
				
15 Min. Sci2 Workflow Design. Padgett's Florentine Families - Prepare, load,
					analyze, and visualize family and business networks from 15th century
					Florence.

				
15 Min. Break

				
30 Min. Sci2 Research Demonstration I. Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project -
					Map concepts and influence in the field of philosophy.

				
30 Min. Sci2 Research Demonstration II. The Republic of Letters - Find
					central correspondents in Early-Modern Europe.

				
30 Min. Q&A and Technical Assistance

			
			
				
Software Needed

				
Custom software that uses Java 1.5 or higher and the OSGI/CIShell (
http://cishell.org
) core
					together with algorithm plugins and sample datasets from the Network Workbench
					Tool (
http://nwb.slis.indiana.edu
) and Science of Science Tool (
http://sci.slis.indiana.edu
).

			
			
				
Suggested Reading

				
					
Börner, Katy, Chen, Chaomei, and Boyack, Kevin. (2003). Visualizing
						Knowledge Domains. In Blaise Cronin (Ed.), ARIST, Medford, NJ: Information
						Today, Inc./American Society for Information Science and Technology, Volume
						37, Chapter 5, pp. 179-255. 
http://ivl.slis.indiana.edu/km/pub/2003-borner-arist.pdf

					
Börner, Katy, Sanyal, Soma and Vespignani, Alessandro (2007). Network
						Science. In Blaise Cronin (Ed.), ARIST, Information Today, Inc./American
						Society for Information Science and Technology, Medford, NJ, Volume 41,
						Chapter 12, pp. 537-607.
http://ivl.slis.indiana.edu/km/pub/2007-borner-arist.pdf

					
Scott Weingart, Hanning Guo, Katy Borner, Kevin W. Boyack, Micah W.
						Linnemeier, Russell J. Duhon, Patrick A. Phillips, Chintan Tank, and Joseph
						Biberstine (2010) Science of Science (Sci2) Tool User Manual.
						Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science Center, School of Library and
						Information Science, Indiana University, Bloomington. 
http://sci.slis.indiana.edu/registration/docs/Sci2_Tutorial.pdf

				

			
			
				
Instructors

				
Scott Weingart is a doctoral student at Indiana University studying History of
					Science and Information Science. His primary research is on the Republic of
					Letters in Early Modern Europe, and has worked with the CKCC project in the
					Netherlands and Dr. Robert A. Hatch at the University of Florida on digitizing,
					visualizing, and analyzing early modern correspondence networks. Scott focuses
					on the intersection of computational analysis and the humanities, and how each
					can shape the other.

			

			
				
Previous Venues

				
NWB and Sci2 have been presented at dozens of previous venues with audience sizes
					ranging from under 10 to over 100. A full list of our previous presentations can
					be found at 
http://cns.slis.indiana.edu/presentations/
. The most
					recent workshop presented specifically for humanists was at the NEH-funded
					Networks and Network Analysis for the Humanities Summer Institute at UCLA in
					August 2010. There were approximately 40 audience members in attendance, and the
					workshop resulted in over half of the attendees using the Sci2 tool in their
					final presentations for the institute.

			

		