Poster: BrailleSC.org: Applying Universal Design Principles to a Digital Humanities
                    Project

                    Williams, George H. , 
                    English, University of South Carolina Upstate, 
                    
gwilliams@uscupstate.edu

                

                    Bohon, Cory, 
                    Computer and Information Systems, University of South Carolina
                        Upstate University of South Carolina Upstate, 
                    
bohon@email.uscupstate.edu

                
Over the last several decades, scholars have developed standards for how best to
                    create, organize, present, and preserve digital information so that future
                    generations of teachers, students, scholars, and librarians may still use it.
                    What has remained neglected for the most part, however, are the needs of
                    disabled end-users, especially those whose vision is impaired. While
                    professionals working in educational technology and commercial web design have
                    made significant progress in meeting the needs of such users, the humanities
                    scholars creating digital projects all too often fail to take these needs into
                    account. This situation would be much improved if more of projects embraced the
                    concept of universal design, the idea that we should always keep the largest
                    possible audience in mind in our design decisions, ensuring that our final
                    product serves the needs of those with disabilities as well as those
                    without.

                
We are proposing a poster session to demonstrate our work in progress on
                    BrailleSC.org, an online scholarly resource dedicated to braille and braille
                    literacy in South Carolina. The earliest stages of development were funded by a
                    grant from the U.S. Department of Special Education, and the site is currently
                    supported by a Level 1 Start-Up Grant from the National Endowment for the
                    Humanities Office of Digital Humanities. The content is managed with both
                    WordPress and Omeka, and for each of these CMSes we are developing accessibility
                    plugins designed to meet the needs of visually impaired users. Our hope is that
                    these plugins become widely adopted by other digital humanities projects that
                    use these same CMSes. During our session we would demonstrate our site, argue
                    for the importance of accessibility, and allow audience members to experience
                    our site in the ways a visually impaired end-user would. We will also discuss
                    the work we are undertaking—at the moment, very preliminary—to develop a tool
                    that would automatically transform an alphabetic text file (encoded in HTML or
                    TEI standards) into a well-formatted contracted braille file. We’re currently
                    looking into whether or not the WordPress plugin Anthologize might be a useful
                    starting point for developing such a capability.

                
BrailleSC seeks to combine digital humanities expertise with the important
                    insights of disability studies in the humanities, an interdisciplinary field
                    that considers disability “a way of interpreting human differences,” in the
                    words of one prominent scholar. Digital knowledge tools that assume all
                    end-users approach information with the same abilities risk excluding a large
                    population of people. If the digital humanities is to accomplish the admirable
                    goal of creating a “big tent,” welcoming a diverse array of participants, then
                    we must broaden our understanding of the ways in which these participants access
                    digital resources. For example, visually-impaired users take advantage of
                    digital technologies for “accessibility” that (with their oral/aural and tactile
                    interfaces) are fascinatingly different than the standard monitor-keyboard-mouse
                    combination, forcing us to rethink our embodied relationship to data. Learning
                    to create scholarly digital archives that take into account these human
                    differences is a necessary task no one has yet undertaken.

                
In partnership with the Center for Digital Humanities in Columbia, South
                    Carolina, and with guidance from George Mason University’s Center for History
                    and New Media, BrailleSC aims to model the ways in which digital humanities
                    projects can be designed and implemented with the needs of all users, regardless
                    of disability. Users with visual impairment often access digital information
                    through a variety of alternatives, not primarily using traditional visual cues
                    presented from the standard graphical user interface. For example, many such
                    users navigate information by listening to a synthesized voice reading textual
                    material aloud to them. The software that generates such a voice is known as a
                    “screen reader.” To make navigation easier for these users, our “Access Keys”
                    plug-in for Omeka allows users to get from page to page and section to section
                    by pressing an easy-to-remember combination of keys. Other users require text
                    enlargement , and our Omeka “Text Zoom” plug-in changes the size of the text to
                    suit their needs. Future work will refine these existing plug-ins and develop
                    additional ones for users to customize such elements as color and contrast.

                
As development of the site content and interface continues, we are conducting
                    various user-testing sessions involving a diverse group of people with varying
                    degrees of visual ability or impairment. All interface tools developed for the
                        BrailleSC project have been or will be released as
                    open source code. All content is being made available under a Creative Commons
                    Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike license. Easy-to-follow instructions for
                    how to implement the accessibility features are currently being created. The
                    Center for Digital Humanities has agreed to provide long-term hosting for all
                    tools and content developed. Finally, a white paper will be released at the
                    project’s conclusion explaining what collaborators have learned about developing
                    designing accessible digital humanities projects and making suggestions for
                    “retrofitting” existing projects.

            
        