Poster: DHAnswers: Building a Community-Based Q&A Board for the Digital
               Humanities

               Gilbert, Joseph, 
               University of Virginia, 
               
joegilbert@virginia.edu

            

               Meloni, Julie, 
               University of Victoria, 
               
jcmeloni@gmail.com

            

               Nowviskie, Bethany, 
               University of Virginia, 
               
bethany@virginia.edu

            

               Sinclair, Stéfan, 
               McMaster University, 
               
sgs@mcmaster.ca

            
Genesis and Motivation 

            
In late September 2010, the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH),
               together with ProfHacker, a technology and productivity blog
               hosted by the Chronicle of Higher Education, announced the
               launch of “DHAnswers,” a community-based question-and-answer board, at 
http://digitalhumanities.org/answers/
.

            
With DHAnswers, the Outreach Committee of the ACH sought to address both an
               opportunity and a problem we detected with existing communication venues for digital
               humanists, such as Twitter, the long-standing Humanist
               discussion list, and individual blogs. We identified a need for DHAnswers after
               observing the burgeoning and helpful “big tent” digital humanities conversation
               happening on Twitter—and the frequency with which answers to questions posed by
               members of that community exceeded Twitter's 140-character limit for tweets, or
               required near-impossible sharing of a code snippet. Other exchanges resulted in
               extended and hard-to capture conversational threads, generally lost in a matter of
               weeks as older tweets were purged from search engines. We also noted that many
               questions asked on Twitter were more specific than those generally asked on the
               Humanist discussion list, or were more basic than a newer member of the DH community
               might feel comfortable posing on specialist mailing lists for software or standards. 

            
A small team from ACH and ProfHacker worked behind the scenes (with most software
               development and extension undertaken by the University of Virginia Library's
               Scholars' Lab and stemming from work on a Spatial Humanities gateway site
               [http://spatial.scholarslab.org]) to create a useful communication platform, with
               pre-defined topic categories (enriched by input from the Executive Council of the
               ACH) to help filter and focus discussion. In addition to a viable, open-source
               platform for discussion, however, this project needed people. We therefore recruited
               approximately 25 digital humanities colleagues from around the world, working in
               different disciplines and with differing areas of expertise to test and cultivate the
               system. We were mostly concerned with having a friendly group of people helping to
               pre-populate the site with sample questions and answers, who could be at the ready in
               the first months after release, to monitor the various notification features we had
               set up (RSS feeds, email options, and automatic Twitter messages) to ensure that
               questions were answered promptly and the proper communities were alerted to relevant
               discussions. We also asked these volunteers to help us keep the discourse on
               DHAnswers positive and friendly. Thanks to the efforts of this group, we were able to
               launch the site with a small amount of content present in each of the following
               categories: 

            
               
Applications, Tools, Formats

               
Databases & Data Structures 

               
Interfaces, Design & Usability

               
DH in the Classroom

               
Markup & Metadata 

               
Programming 

               
New Media & Games 

               
Project Management & DH Professions 

               
and “About DHAnswers” 

            
            
Reaction to the public release of DHAnswers was enthusiastic. Within a week, nearly
               200 people had registered for accounts and created nearly 300 responses in the site's
               question-and answer threads. One month in, it is rare to see a question go unanswered
               for more than a few hours—and thanks to Twitter integration, many questions garner
               immediate response. 

         
         
            
Technical Implementation 

            
DHAnswers leverages an open-source bbPress platform, which employs PHP and MySQL and
               is related to the popular WordPress content management system. With a flexible system
               for creating new stylistic themes and adding new functionality through plugins,
               bbPress allowed us to create a custom set of features built upon a supported and
               extensible base architecture. To keep the site as lean and usable as possible, and in
               the hope of creating a self-explanatory service, we simplified or removed altogether
               a number of features from the out-of-the-box bbPress application. 


            
Given a strong digital humanities presence on Twitter, integrating DHAnswers with
               that target community was deemed imperative to the site's success. We introduced
               purpose-built plugins to broadcast new questions from the @DHAnswers Twitter account,
               giving both DHAnswers members and non-members alike a real-time peek into the ongoing
               conversation. Initially, we enabled even deeper integration with Twitter: site
               members could tweet a message to the @DHAnswers account in order to create a new
               question on the DHAnswers site. In the end, we realized that the complexity of rules
               and procedures for this connection would require a lengthy, nuanced explanation to
               each user. The added Twitter functions thus ran counter our goal of a straightforward
               tool that scholars could easily integrate with their normal communication methods,
               and we removed them. 


            
To facilitate fast-paced conversation, we created email notifications and RSS feeds
               for all questions and/or for a selection of “favorite” topics. To reward regular user
               involvement, the Scholars’ Lab create a new plugin to add various “badges,” small
               medal-like symbols that indicate a certain number of posts made or questions
               answered, to user profiles. We feel certain that the robust notification system and
               subtle reward mechanism for constructive behavior on the site spurred rapid growth
               and a quick response time for new questions. 

         

         
            
Response from the DH Community 

            
The multiple broadcast methods (Twitter, RSS, email) for new questions and answers
               helped bring together what some feel are disparate groups within the digital
               humanities: those who are on Twitter and those who are not. Although Twitter
               integration is a key feature of DHAnswers, Twitter participation is not required of
               DHAnswers users. Instead of relying solely on the segment of the DH community on
               Twitter, and thereby narrowing our audience rather than expanding it, DHAnswers has
               focused on building its own community: the multiple broadcast methods, our
               "reward" badges mentioned previously, the ability for users to select
               "favorite" posts within the system, and our administrative caretaking have
               all worked to create a community of sharing and mentoring. On more than one occasion,
               a new user has come to DHAnswers to ask a question, never having set a virtual foot
               within the initial Twitter community that inspired it (and never intending to), and
               has found himself or herself surrounded by senior members of both the DHAnswers
               community and the broader digital humanities community, ready to answer questions
               from all. Contrary to initial expectations, conversations on DHAnswers have centered
               on pedagogical and institutional questions, such as building a Digital Humanites
               center or designing a curriculum, rather than technical inquiries on specific
               processes. Also, unexpected disciplines, such as archaeology, have established lively
               running conversations whereas more explicitly digital fields—like media studies—have
               had relatively limited involvement. 

            
One of the differences between user interactions in the DHAnswers forum and within
               other social networking spaces is that the inherent expectation of asynchronous
               responses allows for fruitful participation by more users and according to their own
               terms of time management. Instead of constantly filtering an incoming information
               stream via Twitter, in which a response more than a few hours later is viewed as out
               of date and nearly useless, DHAnswers participants understand that a threaded
               discussion will remain in plain sight for several days, thus providing the mental
               space for better discussion. When comments are added to the thread, the “freshness”
               of the thread—as well as the notifications in place throughout the system—continue to
               keep the information in view; this process extends the life of the question and, in
               turn, the visibility of the answers. In addition, we find that users are taking
               advantage of the ability to “tweet this question”—re-posting questions of interest to
               them on Twitter—and therefore are helping to ensure that questions get useful answers
               and important discussions remain in the public eye. 

         

         
            
Analysis 

            
In the spirit of ongoing attempts to define and describe the Digital Humanities
               community (see for instance Svensson’s “The Landscape of Digital Humanities” in Digital Humanities Quarterly vol. 4 no. 1, Summer 2010),
               DHAnswers provides an interesting opportunity to gather insights about who digital
               humanists are and what they do, or at least some of who they are and some of what
               they do (see also Bethany Nowviskie’s article “DH Answers by the Numbers” in the Chronicle of Higher Education’s ProfHacker blog for December 8,
               2010). The value of such insights is of course moderated by the specific
               circumstances of the site, an English-only resource sponsored by two predominantly
               North American organizations (ACH and ProfHacker), with strong links to an existing
               Twitter-based community. 

            
In its first month of its existence (essentially October 2010), DHAnswers recorded
               over 19,000 pages viewed by some 5,575 visitors from 64 countries (these data have
               been collected by Google Analytics and only include traffic to the main site, not RSS
               and Twitter feeds). The geographical distribution indicates a predominance of
               visitors from the USA, but also reveals emerging digital humanities regions such as
               Australia and Japan. 


            

               
Figure 1

               
Full Size Image 

            
            
Similarly, the geographical distribution of site visits within the United States can
               be revealing of regional activity in digital humanities. 

            

               
Figure 2

               
Full Size Image 

            
            
Also noteworthy is that in the first month over 250 users have registered to
               DHAnswers and there have been nearly 600 posts. The most frequently visited page,
               after the home page, is a topic on defining digital humanities, which further
               reinforces the community’s desire to understand itself. 

            

               
Figure 3

               
Full Size Image 

            
            
In addition to further analysis of the web logs, we will spend some time analyzing
               and interpreting the actual content of the DHAnswers posts. For instance, the graph
               below, generated by Voyeur Tools, shows that the word “like” was the third most
               common content word in all of the posts, and fairly consistently present across the
               corpus (the trend column, which indicates relative frequency by topic). The word
               carries several meanings, of course, but a closer examination of the usages suggests
               a notable predilection of digital humanists to express preferences and make
               comparisons. 

            

               
Figure 4

               
Full Size Image 

            
         
      
References:

         
            
               

                  Meloni, Julie
                   “Announcing Digital Humanities Questions & Answers
                     (@DHAnswers), ” 
                  ProfHacker: The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
                  2010
                  
         (
link
)
   
               

               

                  Nowviskie, Bethany
                   “DH Answers by the Numbers, ” 
                  ProfHacker: The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
                  2010
                  
         (
link
)
   
               

               

                  Svensson, Patrik
                   “The Landscape of Digital Humanities, ” 
                  Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                  4
                  1
                  2010
                  
         (
link
)
   
               

            
         

      