Poster: ArchiTrace: An Urban Social History and Mapping
                Platform

                    Nieves, Angel David, 
                    Hamilton College, United States of America, 
                    
anieves@hamilton.edu

                
ArchiTrace is a dynamic, web-based markup tool that will
                    allow researchers and content authors to work together in a collaborative
                    co-authoring environment as they build and share architectural drawings, maps,
                    and spatial representations of African urban spaces across a historical
                    timeline. By focusing on the spatial dimensions of the built environment,
                    historical and present-day cityscapes become both the backdrop and interface to
                    a rich archive of cultural heritage assets gathered over the course of their
                    historical development. ArchiTrace will combine a broad
                    range of artifacts such as historical texts and photographs, maps and aerial
                    photographs, providing both cultural and historical context to the depicted
                    regions. Finally, by allowing an audience to watch the transformation of both
                    the spaces and their cultural artifacts evolve over expansive timelines,
                    researchers will be able to follow the historical tracks of the evolution of the
                    regions themselves.

                
In the example of Soweto, the model housing schemes of the 1950s through the
                    1980s provided by the state government and its architects were essentially an
                    attempt at social control, but through the inspection of aerial photography and
                    the differences in what was proposed, built, and modified by residents reveals a
                    certain amount of resistance to the ordered panopticon of township housing
                    schemes.

                
Through the aerial photography captured over a 50-year period, the changes in the
                    city’s physical landscape suggest a form of spatial resistance to the imposed
                    uniformity of the built environment under apartheid. By facilitating
                    architectural and spatial comparisons of this kind through a suite of
                    interactive mapping and comparative tools, ArchiTrace
                    will allow historically embedded social histories to become emergent features of
                    the overall presentation. Where projects like HyperCities focus on the
                    development of the urban form, ArchiTrace facilitates the
                    curation of a biographical narrative in a city’s social history as a way to
                    characterize the development of a region and its people.Todd Presner,
                        “Hypercities: A Case Study for the Future of Scholarly Publishing,” The
                        Shape of Things to Come, ed. Jerome McGann (Houston: Rice University Press,
                        2010), 251-71. HyperCities provides a blank canvas for understanding
                    urban form, while ArchiTrace will provide a spatial
                    subtext to urban place making.

                
ArchiTrace’s granular data structure will allow users to
                    inspect fine detail in a city environment at any level of scope, whether
                    tracking the development of entire neighborhoods over decades, or the changes of
                    an individual building’s architecture over the course of mere years. ArchiTrace will offer content authors tools for the
                    creation of data units at several different scopes. Content authors can “curate”
                    the granular layering of spatial information from the level of individual home,
                    block, town or city, to more generalized regional levels. ArchiTrace’s uniquely granular data structure is inspired by
                    architectural “Building lives:” mapping the life cycle of an urban form across a
                    variety of scales and time periods.

                
ArchiTrace will feature prominent social networking and
                    collaborating tools, allowing researchers and content authors the opportunity to
                    build, share, and co-edit materials within a project collection. This can range
                    from the simple sharing of files within a project’s workspace to the realtime
                    shared editing of text, architectural drawings, and annotations. ArchiTrace aims to facilitate researchers and
                    participants alike in the creation of both collections and exhibits, acting as
                    both an archival and educational platform for researchers and public
                    audience.

                
By engaging open source software and standards, ArchiTrace
                    aims to create an extensible project platform capable of growing in the many
                    directions promised by forthcoming web technologies. As web-based 3D technology
                    becomes more broadly implemented in future web browsers, we anticipate being
                    able to integrate the models from which our images are derived into an
                    interactive and dynamically-generated 3D environment. Although the initial
                    depictions of ArchiTrace’s cityscapes will begin as
                    2-dimensional representations, we aim to eventually extend those aerial
                    photographs, maps, and still- image renderings of the project into 3D
                    models.

                
A recent series of discoveries, in the South African National Archives, provides
                    for some new ways to begin mapping the growth and development of townships over
                    the forty-six year apartheid era. Over the past four months I have come across a
                    cache of maps, architectural plans, aerial photographs and other source
                    documents related to the design and planning of townships across the city of
                    Johannesburg. These drawings and plans suggest, as many historians have
                    previously stated, “the apartheid state remained steadfastly committed to
                    terror” through the design and “layout of the location [townships which] were
                    planned with explicit, detailed attention to the disciplinary potentials of
                        space.”Ivan Evans, Bureaucracy and Race: Native Administration in
                        South Africa (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997). As
                    some have argued, “The tyranny of the planners’ blueprints yielded a degree of
                    spatial compartmentalization whose sheer banality had profound implications for
                    every aspect of urban life.”Ibid. As noted, “when planners reshape
                    the built environment, individuals are compelled to adjust accordingly,
                    reinforcing to some extent the spatial parameters of their
                        oppression.”Ibid. I am however suggesting that individuals and
                    communities impart changing meanings to spatial structures over time. Space not
                    only becomes implicated in the transformation of self-perceptions and the
                    capacities of social groups – space both restrains and enables in some deeply
                    profound ways. Township residents “were neither simple victims of the state nor
                    pure protagonists of resistance” – they negotiated their daily lives through
                    their engagements with racialized space-making. Resistance, among those
                    incarcerated/detained/imprisoned in “planned communities” like Japanese
                    Americans in internment camps, or victims of the Holocaust through concentration
                    camps, is as much about the forging of bonds within space as it is about
                    propelling struggles from one “stage” (or township), to another. How then might
                    we document the “spatial underpinnings of apartheid [era] projects”? After the
                    Soweto Uprising of 1976, the spatial compression, brought on by township
                    planning and design, enabled for the mass proliferation of dense political
                    networks within and between Black residential areas across Johannesburg. How
                    might we then use spatial tools to document the history of resistance, while
                    also telling the story of the ways in which residents converted the bureaucratic
                    and spatial impediments to political mobilization into weapons of struggle?
                    These and other questions – that have yet to be formulated – are the basis for
                    developing ArchiTrace.

            
        