Introduction: From the Chair of the DH2011 International Program Committee

                    Katherine L. Walter, 
                    University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
                    
kwalter@unlnotes.unl.edu

                
This year is a very special one as the Digital Humanities 2011 conference returns
                    to California with the new theme “Big Tent Digital Humanities.” The DH2011
                    conference has more papers and a wider range of topics than many in the past. In
                    large part, this is thanks to all of you who took the theme to heart and
                    participated by submitting abstracts for panels, papers and posters. In hopes of
                    addressing the issue of a growing conference, the program committee called for
                    both long and short papers, with longer ones addressing newly concluded research
                    or theory, and short papers reporting on research in progress. It is through the
                    short papers that we were able to expand the conference. The Program Committee
                    encourages you to explore new topics outside your comfort zone. Our field is
                    broad and the conference reflects this. Where better to learn new things?

                
As mentioned, the Digital Humanities conference is growing, and the number of
                    papers proposed far exceeded the number of time slots available. In response to
                    this, the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations, its member associations,
                    and the Conference Coordinating Committee are considering new approaches to the
                    conference. Among ideas raised have been expanding the number of concurrent
                    sessions, extending the conference by one day, and extending the length of the
                    day. Your thoughts on this issue are appreciated and can be submitted to the
                    Conference Coordinating Committee.

                
In recognition of our Big DH Tent, our keynote addresses are by David Rumsey,
                    creator of the well-known eponymous map collection and president of Cartography
                    Associates; and J.B. Michel and Erez Lieberman-Aiden of Harvard University, who
                    will be speaking about their large-scale “culturomics” research conducted in
                    association with the Google Books project. Thus the conference begins with the
                    public (and geospatial) humanities, and concludes with corpus research on
                    previously unimaginable scales. 

                
I would like to thank the members of the international program committee who have
                    contributed so much of their time. The members of the committee are:
                
                

                
Local organizers Glen Worthey and Matt Jockers have been great contributors to our efforts. 

                
Finally, I would like to thank all of you who agreed to review abstracts; you are acknowledged individually in the pages of this book.  Your time is appreciated, and together, I believe we have planned an exceptional conference.  

            
        