Poster: Documenting Horizons of Interpretation in Philosophy

                    Saisó, Ernesto Priani, 
                    History of Philosophy and Humanities Computing, Facultad de
                        Filosofía y Letras, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 
                    
epriani@gmail.com

                

                    Farfán, Leticia Flores, 
                    History of Philosophy, Facultad de Filosofía y Letras, Universidad
                        Nacional Autónoma de México, 
                    
floresfarfanleticia@gmail.com

                

                    Zavala, Daniel, 
                    Independent software developer, 
                    
siedrix@gmail.com

                

                    Choreño, Rafael Gómez, 
                    History of Philosophy, Facultad de Filosofía y Letras, Universidad
                        Nacional Autónoma de México, 
                    
rafaelangelg@yahoo.com

                

                    Priego, Ernesto, 
                    Department of Information Studies, University College
                        London, 
                    
efpriego@gmail.com

                
Abstract

                
URL of the project:
         (
link
)
   


                
This poster presentation will describe a project currently underway at the
                    Faculty of Filosofía y Letras, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM).
                    It has been funded by a grant from the Programa de Apoyo a Proyectos para la
                    Innovación y Mejoramiento de la Enseñanza (PAPIME), a university endowment
                    program for innovation in education. It is a collaborative documentation project
                    of the individual and collective processes of research and writing of a group of
                    25 researchers, working on papers about the contemporary strategies of
                    appropriation of the antiquity and aims to use innovative web-based technology
                    to document different data of the research/writing process and to create a
                    visualization model to use the data for educative and didactical purposes.

            
            
                
Background, Assumptions and Needs

                
In May 2010 a group of professors and researchers teaching at the Facultad de
                    Filosofía y Letras, UNAM, gathered to start a project following Barbara Cassin’s
                    proposal from the conference Les Stratégies contemporaines
                        d'appropriation de l'Antiquité. The objective is to create a seminar
                    and produce papers on the subject of the contemporary strategies of
                    appropriation of the antiquity, for a series of publications to be used as a
                    teaching material in a variety of courses in Contemporary and Classical
                    philosophy at the faculty.

                
The main assumption of the project is that we cannot have access to the classic
                    antiquity without mediation or heritage (Gadamer 2005). Reading and studying
                    Classical philosophy implies the act of taking a position in a horizon of
                    interpretation from which the object of research is built, the problems around
                    it are articulated and the center of attention is decided.

                
Project’s seminar and papers will discuss those strategies in contemporary
                    authors from France and Germany, who study the antiquity and point out the
                    horizon of interpretation from which they approach the ancient texts. The
                    findings will be used to teach the conceptions of contemporary authors and their
                    ideas of Classical philosophy, as an example of Nietzsche’s thesis that there
                    are not facts but interpretations (1998), and to explain technically to students
                    the process that produces an interpretation.

                
The idea to use a web-based technology for a collaborative documentation project
                    came afterwards, once all these ideas about the project were settled. A paradox
                    emerged from the project approach: in order to describe those horizons of
                    interpretation of all the researchers, both as individuals and as a group,
                    needed to create their own horizon of interpretation. Can we document that
                    process? With that documentation, can we answer the question “from which horizon
                    are they writing?” And can we use the documentation for teaching?

                
As opposed to traditional research in philosophy, which analyzes finished works
                    to set the horizon of interpretation; we want to produce a record of an ongoing
                    work to show how the horizon is created and how it changes with the influence of
                    new readings or the interaction with other researchers. These goals lead us to
                    two main problems:

                

                        
What kind of data do we need to collect to have an idea of the horizon
                            of interpretation?

                        
How to collect data in an open and dynamic way that allows us to
                            follow the process of research and its changes during a period of
                            time?

                    
                
We focus on the two main activities in academic literacy: reading and writing.
                    The kinds of data we want to obtain are the reading annotations as an evidence
                    of reading and the variants of the progressive writingCheryl Geisler
                        (1994). Academic Literacy and he Nature of Expertise: Reading, Writing, and
                        Knowing in Academic Philosophy, Laurence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers. New
                        Jersey, 1994 pp. 15 ss. Also, it will be relevant for us to keep a
                    record of the methodology adopted by the individual researchers as a single data
                    or as a succession of variants.

                
All these data must be obtained while researchers are working on the project and
                    until they finish their papers. It is vital to have not only a record of
                    individual activity but also of the collective work of the professors.



            
            
                
Blogging, Annotating, Writing

                
Our project is an application of collaborative "crowdsourcing" (Albors 2008),
                    following previous experiences in Digital Humanities. For instance, we have in
                    mind the success of “A Day in the Life of Digital Humanities”, using blogging
                    and wiki for collaborative documentation of daily activities of digital
                        humanistsDay in the Life of the Digital Humanities project is at
                        http://tapor.ualberta.ca/taporwiki/index.php/Day_in_the_Life_of_the_Digital_Humanities_2010.
                    It consists of each one of our 25 researchers writing their own blog in which
                    they document their daily research activities, as well as commentating on other
                    blog entries during a year. This mechanism will allow us to have the seminar
                    virtually and to trace collective work around independent participation.
                    However, additionally we need to collect annotations and methodological
                    assumptions. In order to do so we have already developed a web application for
                    these specifics needs:

                
                    
Capturing and Highlighting Quotes:

                    
With our web application researchers can upload book passages and highlight
                        some paragraphs in it, to document and share its readings. Every passage
                        will be able to be marked by different researchers and the web application
                        allows comparisons between these marks. Highlighting different parts of a
                        same text shows individual decision and collective assumptions.

                    
During the process of the project, all the mark up will be made as a
                        reference to a place on the passage and they will be part of a rendering
                        system in Javascript. This makes the marks live outside the text. Once the
                        project is finished, the marks will be exported to TEI to preserve the
                        documents and marks that will be part of the text. Nevertheless, during this
                        process each contributor can mark Dates, Names, Terms and Quotes as done
                        with TEI Lite in order to also produce a strong markup of the text to use it
                        didactically for students, for example, by linking those marks to
                        complementary information about the persons named, the terms used, etc.
                        Passages entries and highlights can be commented by other participants and
                        can be linked to blog entries.

                
                
                    
Explain and Update Methodology

                    
Researchers can explain their methodology and are able to update their
                        methodological assumptions anytime they decide to change the study
                        methodology or the study subject in our web application, simply by filling
                        the methodology box in their profile. At the end of the project we will be
                        able to compare the evolution of the research in a timeline, mixed with
                        their blog post and annotation, having an insightful way to analyze the
                        initial work and their finished paper.

                
            
            
                
Individual and Collective

                
Highlighting quotations and comments on blog and quotation entries are ways to
                    have evidence of individual decisions and collective assumptions. We extend this
                    view to the creation of metadata. As it is used in many commercial and academic
                    projects, researchers can create metadata or use those that had been created by
                    others, for sources excerpts and blogs. Metadata are central to finding links
                    between autonomous and collective work. The final ontology can help us to
                    understand how strong the collective or the individual view has been. We are
                    still working on the metadata creation rules.

            
            
                
The Didactic Aim

                
As an educational project, the last objective is to use the documentation to help
                    students to understand how we study the classical antiquity from a horizon of
                    interpretation. As a tool for education, it allows students to:

                

                        
Follow individual researcher’s work in real time during the activity
                            of the project.

                        
Compare quotes and highlights being used by different
                            researchers.

                        
Follow the entries (blogging, passages, highlighting, methodology) on
                            a modern or classical author.

                        
Have extra information about modern or classical authors (reference,
                            biography, bibliography)

                    
            
            
                
Workflow

                

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
            
            
                
Authors

                

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
            
            
                
Blog

                

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
            
            
                
Sources Excerpts

                

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Albors, José et al.
                        2008
                         “New learning network paradigms: Communities of objectives,
                            crowdsourcing, wikis and open source, ” 
                        International Journal of Information Management, 
                        28
                        3
                        194-202
                    

                    

                        Burnard, Lou  C. M. Sperberg-McQueen
                        2006
                        TEI Lite: Encoding for Interchange: an introduction to the
                            TEI — Revised for TEI P5 release, 
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Gadamer, Hans-Georg
                        2005
                        Verdad y Método I [Traducción de A. Agud y R. de
                            Agapito], 
                        Sígueme
                        Salamanca
                    

                    

                        Howe, Jeff
                        2006
                         “The Rise of Crowdsourcing, ” 
                        Wired, 
                        June 2006
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    



                    

                        Nietzsche, Friedrich
                        1998
                        Sobre verdad y mentira en sentido extramoral, seguido de La
                            voluntad de ilusión de Nietzsche de Hans Vaihinger [Traducción de Luis
                            M. Valdés y Teresa Orduña], 
                        Tecnos
                        Barcelona
                    


                
            
        