Poster: The Effect of Cheating on Player Engagement in Video Games

                    Keenan, Andy, 
                    Humanities Computing, University of Alberta, 
                    
andrewtkeenan@gmail.com

                
Introduction

                
Creating an engaging video game requires the appropriate balance between
                    challenge and reward for players. This balance is known as “difficulty”.
                    Currently, difficulty is created, designed, and managed by video game
                    developers. Difficulty is controlled by fundamental design decisions. For
                    example, in Super Mario Brothers (NES 1986), Mario has a specific number of
                    lives. When Mario loses those lives by making mistakes, the game is over. The
                    difficulty of Super Mario Brothers is progressing through the levels without
                    losing lives. The game balances the challenge of limited lives with the reward
                    of completion. If Super Mario Brothers failed to find the right difficulty, the
                    game would be either too frustrating or too easy. Finding the appropriate level
                    of difficulty for the largest number of players is an important design decision
                    made by video game developers.

                
The purpose of this project is to explore player-controlled approaches to
                    difficulty in video games. This project repositions the existing power
                    relationship between player and developer, where the developer decides the
                    difficulty. Based on my previous research, I will be analyzing how cheating
                    allows players to manipulate difficulty and change the relationship between
                    player and developer. Cheating enables players to alter game difficulty,
                    enabling players to find their own balance between challenge and reward. This
                    project will provide design recommendations for the video game industry to
                    re-imagine the relationship between video game player and video game developer,
                    empowering the player to determine the rules of their game play experience.

            
            
                
Context

                
Johan Huizinga argues that play creates a space apart from normal life. He
                    referred to this space as the magic circle. While in play, players are subject
                    to a special set of rules. Play is dependent on these rules. Participating in
                    play requires all players to enter into the magic circle and abide by its rules.
                    The stability of the game depends on its rules: “[if] the rules are transgressed
                    the whole play-world collapses. The game is over” (Huizinga 1950, p3).
                    Huizinga’s magic circle requires a second examination in regards to video games.
                    Allowing players to manipulate the rules alters the power relationship between
                    developers and players, which could enable players to create more engaging
                    experiences.

                
Several academic studies have attempted to determine what makes games engaging.
                    Cognitive research in video games suggests that game developers must adjust
                    cognitive difficulty requiring players to change their cognitive model to
                    succeed. This will keep players engaged by challenging their cognitive process
                    (Graham, Zheng & Gonzalez 2006). Other studies found that players require
                    realistic worlds, intuitive controls, character customization, exploration, and
                    unpredictability (Wood, Griffiths, Chappell & Davies 2004). A
                    player-feedback study suggests that a combination of different intensities of
                    challenge, combining “hard fun” (complex strategy, difficult challenges, and
                    powerful enemies) and “easy fun” (exploration, simple puzzles, and novel
                    experience) creates an ideal experience (Lazarro 2004). Yet another study argues
                    for the importance of goal-oriented play with few negative consequences
                    (Provenzo 1991). More abstractly, play must be internally motivated,
                    simultaneously transcend and reflect reality, focus on the process over the
                    result, and provide safe yet unpredictable experience (Stagnitti 2004). There is
                    a gap in the current literature exploring the impact of cheating on
                    engagement.


            
            
                
Thesis

                
This presentation explores the relationship between cheating and engagement in
                    video games. Recent innovations in video game design allow players to manipulate
                    game difficulty through time manipulation, an activity once considered cheating.
                    These time manipulation games serve as a case-study to examine cheating and the
                    effect on player engagement. Manipulating time allows players to control
                    difficulty and find an iterative balance between challenge and reward. Players
                    can also create emergent game play types by deciding what constitutes a
                    meaningful “beat” of play.

            
            
                
Methodology

                
Using a mixed methods approach, I combined a heuristic inquiry of games that
                    allow time manipulation with Foucauldian discourse analysis. I examined the
                    practice of time manipulation in several console video games including Forza
                    Motorsport 3 (Microsoft 2009); Braid (Microsoft 2008); Skate (Electronic Arts
                    2007), Skate 2 (Electronic Arts 2009); World of Goo (2D Boy 2008); Prince of
                    Persia: Sands of Time (Ubisoft 2003); Demon’s Souls (Sony 2009); and Madden 09
                    (Electronic Arts 2008). Heuristic inquiry is a qualitative research approach
                    concerned directly with human knowing and self-inquiry. This method “is aimed at
                    discovering the nature and meaning of an experience” (Hiles 2008, p389). This is
                    a departure from mainstream research “in that it explicitly acknowledges the
                    involvement of the researcher to the extent that the lived experience of the
                    researcher becomes the main focus of the research” (ibid). Based on my
                    experiences with these games, I conducted a Foucauldian discourse analysis
                    focusing on player engagement and player empowerment. I analyzed how activities
                    once considered cheating altered the player’s relationship to the game.

            
            
                
Conclusion

                
I discovered that player-determined difficulty effected by level of engagement
                    with the games. By controlling the game’s difficulty through its interface, the
                    level of engagement was increased. Manipulating time allows players to learn
                    iteratively and manage their level of challenge in the game experience. As an
                    interface feature, manipulating time encouraged the “flow” state: Mihaly
                    Csikszentmihalyi’s theory of optimal experience. Csikszentmihalyi’s Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (1990)
                    describes flow as being completely involved in an activity. Reducing frustration
                    and allowing players to control their experience by rewinding time creates this
                    flow state in video games.

            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        2008
                        Braid, 
                        Number None: Microsoft
                    

                    

                        Csikszentmihalyi, M.
                        1990
                        Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, 
                        Harper and Row
                        New York
                    

                    

                        2009
                        Demon’s Souls, 
                        Atlus: Sony
                    

                    

                        2009
                        Forza Motorsport 3, 
                        Turn 9: Microsoft
                    

                    

                        Foucault, Michel
                        1972
                        The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language.
                            (A. Sheridan, Trans.), 
                        Pantheon
                        New York
                    

                    

                        Graham, J., Zheng, L., and Gonzalez, C.
                        2006
                         “A Cognitive Approach to Game Usability and Design: Mental
                            Model Development in Novice Real-Time Strategy Gamers, ” 
                        CyberPsychology & Behaviour, 
                        Volume 9, Issue 3
                        361-366
                    

                    

                        Hiles, David
                        2008
                         “Heuristic Inquiry, ” 
                        The Sage Encyclopedia of Qualitative Research
                            Methods, 
                        Lisa Given
                        Sage
                        Los Angeles
                        389-392
                    

                    

                        Huizinga, Johan
                        1950
                        Homo ludens: A study of the play element in culture, 
                        Beacon Press
                        Boston
                    

                    

                        Lazzaro, N.
                        2004
                        Why We Play Games: Four Keys to More Emotion Without Story.
                            Player Experience Research and Design for Mass Market Interactive
                            Entertainment, 
                        XEODesign Inc..
                        Oakland, CA
                    

                    

                        2008
                        Madden 09, 
                        EA Tiburon: Electronic Arts
                    

                    

                        2003
                        Prince of Persia: Sands of Time, 
                        Ubisoft Montreal: Ubisoft
                    

                    

                        Provenzo, E. F.
                        1991
                        Video kids: Making sense of Nintendo, 
                        Harvard University Press
                        Cambridge, MA
                    

                    

                        2007
                        Skate, 
                        EA Black Box: Electronic Arts
                    

                    

                        1986
                        Super Mario Brothers, 
                        Nintendo: Nintendo Entertainment
                    

                    

                        Stagnitti, K.
                        2004
                         “Understanding play: The implications for play
                            assessment, ” 
                        Australian Occupational Therapy Journal, 
                        Volume 51, Issue 1
                        3-12
                    

                    

                        Wood, R., Griffiths, M., Chappell, D., and Davies, M.
                        2004
                         “The Structural Characteristics of Video Games: A
                            Psycho-Structural Analysis, ” 
                        CyberPsychology & Behaviour, 
                        Volume 7, Issue 1
                        1-10
                    

                    

                        2008
                        World of Goo, 
                        2D Boy: 2D Boy
                    




                
            
        