Poster: A Labanotation Editing Tool for Description and Reproduction of Stylized
               Traditional Dance Body Motion

               Choensawat, Worawat, 
               School of Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University , 
               
gr0011es@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp

            

               Takahashi, Sachie, 
               School of Letters, Ritsumeikan University , 
               
nr013082@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp,

            

               Nakamura, Minako, 
               Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences, Ochanomizu University , 
               
nakamuraminako@gmail.com

            

               Hachimura, Kozaburo, 
               School of Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University , 
               
hachimura@media.ritsumei.ac.jp

            
Introduction 


            
A stylized traditional dance has uniqueness in itself which reflects history,
               culture, emotion expression, etc. When recording and representing this traditional
               dance body motions, it is important to have capabilities for handling these very
               characteristic body movements, which can probably be handled with the full-set of
               Labanotation (Hutchinson, 1997). However, notation score becomes extremely
               complicated, and we will not be able to comprehend what is that movement. 


            
We are facing a problem how to realize a method of describing detailed features and
               nuance of artistic, traditional dance movements while suppressing the complexity in
               notation score. 


            
Several graphics applications has been developed for preparing Labanotation scores
               (Brown and Smoliar, 1976; Fox, 2000) and generating body movement (Calvert, 2007;
               Coyle et al. 2005; Coyle et al. 2002;
               Wilke et al. 2005). However none of them solved the
               abovementioned problem yet. 


            
We have been working on a system named LabanEditor (Kojima et
                  al. 2002; Nakamura and Hachimura, 2006). It includes functionalities of both
               inputting/editing Labanotation score and displaying character animation so that
               beginners who are not familiar with Labanotation can study about its description by a
               trial-and-error approach. 


            
In this paper, we aim at description and reproduction of the body motion of stylized
               traditional dances by using fundamental elements of Labanotation while keeping the
               quality of body movement of CG character animation. We propose and implement a
               dynamic template technique enabling users to notate stylized traditional dances and
               reproducing it in 3D CG animation from a Labanotation score. 

         
         
            
Labanotation 


            
Labanotation is a graphical notation system for recording human body movements.
               Figure 1 (a) is an example of Labanotation scores corresponding to dance motion. A
               Labanotation score is drawn in a form of vertical staff where each column corresponds
               to a body part. Figure 1 (b) shows the basic arrangement of columns in the staff. The
               horizontal dimension of the staff represents the parts of the body, and the vertical
               dimension represents time. 

            

                  
Figure 1. Labanotation scores; (a) Example of Labanotation scores and (b)
                     Columns of Labanotation representing body parts. 

                  
Full Size Image 

               
            
         
         
            
LabanEditor 


            
LabanEditor (Kojima et al. 2002) is an interactive graphical
               editor for editing Labanotation scores and displaying the 3D CG character animation
               associated with scores. 


            
We added the new features to LabanEditor as follow: 


            

               
Dynamic template technique enabling users to notate movements and reproducing
                  it in 3D CG animation using fundamental description of Labnotation. 


               
Motion control module for manipulate the motion expression among key-frames in
                  order to make the animation more natural. 


            

            
               
User Interface 


               
With LabanEditor, users are able to input and edit the score and then display the
                  CG animation immediately, which makes possible to interactively confirm the
                  movements. Users can zoom in/out and change the viewpoint of the 3D scene on all
                  three axes. 


               
While replaying the Labanotation score, users can observe the animation as well as
                  the red horizontal line cursor, moving upward corresponding to the animation
                  progresses, as shown in Figure 2. 


               

                  

                     
Figure 2. CG animation display window. 

                     
Full Size Image 

                  
               
            
            
               
Generating the CG Animation 


               
Labanotation scores can be represented as a simple format called LND (Kojima et al. 2002), which uses alphanumeric characters to
                  represent basic symbols. To create 3D character animation, we have to convert LND
                  into animation data. The format of LND representation is shown in Figure 3. The
                  lines that begin with “#” indicate the fundamental parameters of Labanotation. The
                  movement of a body part is specified by the line followed by a command
                  “direction”, which corresponds to the Labanotation direction symbols. 

               

                  

                     
Figure 3. Example of LND. 

                     
Full Size Image 

                  
               
               
LND describes a pose just like key-frame body postures for animation, so that we
                  can produce motion of the body part by simply applying interpolation between start
                  and end key-frame poses. A key-frame pose of a body part at a timing corresponding
                  to an end of the symbol is defined by a Labanotation symbol. 


               
Our system converts direction symbols into animation key-frames by using a
                  template file for a mapping between the symbol and its corresponding pose of the
                  body part. 


               
The template file describes the relationship between a direction symbol at the
                  particular column and the rotation and the translation of the corresponding joint.
                  Figure 4 shows a notation and description in a template file, and the resulting
                  pose. 

               

                  

                     
Figure 4. Relationship between user input symbols and a template file;
                        (a) User input symbol, (b) Part of a template file, and (c) Snapshot of the
                        CG animation corresponding to the template in (b). 

                     
Full Size Image 

                  
               
            
            
               
Dynamic Template Technique 


               
Due to the rough resolution of fundamental elements of Labanotation, similar but
                  distinct poses are sometimes defined with the same symbol in a Labanotation score. 


               
To solve this problem, we invented the method of dynamic templates in order to
                  represent very specific movements using the fundamental subset of Labanotation
                  symbols only. With the dynamic template technique, we can represent these
                  characteristic motions by changing the template files dynamically during a display
                  process, while using very fundamental symbols. 


               
Figure 5 (a) shows the interface of editing template file. Users can activate the
                  editing window by double clicking on a Labanotation symbol. For example, suppose
                  the symbol in the Labanotation score, indicated by a red color in Figure 5 (a),
                  was selected by a user, then, the user can directly edit the joint angles on an
                  editable template panel as shown in Figure 5(a). 


               
Alternatively, the graphically editable template, which is activated by clicking
                  the „Animate‟ button in Figure 5 (a), enables the user to edit the template by
                  adjusting the slide bars and observe the resulting pose as shown in Figure 5 (b). 


               

                  

                     
Figure 5. Interface for editing a template; (a) Template editing panel
                        and (b) Graphical template editing panel. 

                     
Full Size Image 


                     
Full Size Image 

                  

               
The information of template files is inserted into a LND file corresponding to the
                  start time as shown in Figure 6. The command “#include” determines the template
                  file used at a particular timing. As a result, in this case, the Labanotation
                  score shown in Figure 5(a) will be interpreted as the LND file shown in Figure 6. 

               

                     
Figure 6. Example of LND file using dynamic templates. 

                     
Full Size Image 

                  

               
During the animation process, the Labanotation symbols, in format of LND, are
                  mapped to the key-frame pose indicated by the current template. 

            
            
               
Motion Expression Control 


               
The motion expression control module controls the animation of character model
                  from one key-frame to the next key-frame. We implemented a module for controlling
                  the motion by applying a non-linear interpolation, cubic Bezier curve, in order to
                  create natural movement. 


               
 EQUATION (1) 


               
Where f(t) is an interpolated position or joint angle at
                  time t and a normalized time scaled from 0.0 to 1.0, respectively. P
0
(0,0) and P
3
(1,1) is the start and end points,
                  respectively, while P
1
 and P
2
 are the
                  control points which can be moved freely as shown in Figure 7. 

               

                     
Figure 7. Motion expression controller user interface. 

                     
Full Size Image 

                  


               
Figure 8 shows two snapshots of the CG animation corresponding to the motion
                  expression graphs on the left. 

               

                     
Figure 8. CG animation snapshots corresponding to the motion expression
                        graphs. 

                     
Full Size Image 

                  
            
         
         
            
Use of LabanEditor for Noh Plays 


            
Noh is the most famous and characteristic Japanese traditional performing arts in the
               stylized form of a musical dance-drama that has been performed since the 14th
               century. There are about 240 plays in the repertoire from five Noh schools (Ortolani,
               1995). 


            
Noh body movement is Japanese highly stylized and is not the same as ordinary human
               movement. Therefore, the direction symbols used in Labanotation must be interpreted
               differently when we handle Noh plays and generate body motion from it. This has been
               realized by preparing motion template files which are editable to represent specific
               motions in that particular performance. 


            
Snapshots of Noh motion are shown in Figure 9. Figure 9 (a) and (b) show the
               reproduced animation of Noh body motion from Labanotation score using the Noh
               templates and standard templates, respectively. 

            

               

                  
Figure 9. CG character animation of Noh Kata (Shitai) (a) CG character
                     animation corresponding to the Labanotation score on the left using Noh
                     (Shitai) template (b) CG character animation corresponding to the Labanotation
                     score on the left using standard template. 

                  
Full Size Image 

               
         
         
            
Conclusions 


            
In this paper we proposed an approach of description and reproduction of stylized
               traditional dances such as Noh plays with Labanotation. A new version of LabanEditor,
               LabanEditor3, successfully describes and reproduces Noh motions by using the dynamic
               template method. 


            
We have obtained a major achievement. Our approach shows that we can describe and
               reproduce Noh plays with the fundamental description of Labanotation, with a limited
               number of symbols by using the dynamic template method. 

         
      
References:

         

            
               

                  Hutchinson, A
                  1977
                   “Labanotation, ” 
                  Theatre Arts Books
               


               

                  Brown, M. D.
                  Smoliar, S.W.
                  1976
                   “A Graphics Editor for Labanotation, ” 
                  Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Conference on Computer Graphics,
                     Interactive Techniques and Image Processing, ACM Computer Graphics, 
                  10 (2)
                  60-65
               


               

                  Fox, I
                  2000
                   “Documentation Technology for the 21st Century, ” 
                  World Dance 2000 Academic Conference, Papers and
                     Abstracts, 
                  137–142
               


               

                  Calvert, T
                  2007
                   “Animating Dance, ” 
                  Proceedings of Graphics Interface, 
                  1-2
               


               

                  Calvert, T
                  Wilke , L
                  Ryman, R and Fox, I
                  2005
                   “Applications of Computers to Dance, ” 
                  IEEE Computer Graphics Application, 
                  25
                  2
                  6-12
               


               

                  Coyle, M
                  Maranan, D and Calvert, T
                  2002
                   “A Tool for Translating Dance Notation to Animation, ” 
                  Proceedings of Western Computer Graphics Symposium, 
               


               

                  Wilke, L
                  Calvert, T
                  Ryman, R & Fox, I
                  2005
                   “From dance notation to human animation, The LabanDancer Project,
                     Motion Capture and Retrieval, ” 
                  Computer Animation and Virtual Worlds, 
                  16
                  3-4
                  201-211
               


               

                  Kojima, K
                  Hachimura, K & Nakamura, M
                  2002
                   “LabanEditor: Graphical Editor for Dance Notation, ” 
                  Proceedings of IEEE 2002 International, Workshop on Robot and
                     Human Interactive Communication, 
                  59-64
               


               

                  Nakamura, M and Hachimura, K
                  2006
                   “An XML Representation of Labanotation, LabanXML, and Its
                     Implementation on the Notation Editor LabanEditor2, ” . Review of the National Center for Digitization (Online Journal), 
                  9
                  47-51
               


               

                  Ortolani, B
                  1995
                  The Japanese Theatre: From Shamanistic Ritual to Contemporary
                     Pluralism, 
                  Princeton University Press
               


            

         

      