Poster: A Collaborative Linguistic Research Interface for the 1641
					Depositions

					O’Regan, Deirdre, 
					School of Language and Literature, University of Aberdeen, King’s
						College, UK, 
					
deirdre.oregan@gmail.com

				

					Sweetnam, Mark, 
					School of Language and Literature, University of Aberdeen, King’s
						College, UK, 
					
sweetnammark@gmail.com 

				

					Fennell, Barbara, 
					School of Language and Literature, University of Aberdeen, King’s
						College, UK, 
					
b.a.fennell@abdn.ac.uk

				

					Lawless, Seamus, 
					Knowledge and Data Engineering Group, Trinity College Dublin,
						Ireland, 
					
seamus.lawless@scss.tcd.ie

				

				
This poster presents an account of the development of a collaborative research
					environment for the socio-historical linguistic exploration of a unique
					seventeenth-century resource of Irish national importance and international
					significance. It is also an account of the process - from inception to
					application - of a highly interdisciplinary, unique collaboration between
					academia and industry, which is part of an evolving set of DH projects.

				
The '1641 Depositions' in Trinity College Dublin comprise some 8,000 personal
					statements, in which mainly Protestant men and women of all classes told of
					their experiences following the outbreak of the 1641 Rebellion in Ireland by the
					Catholic Irish. Collected by government-appointed commissioners, the witness
					testimony runs to approximately 20,000 pages, and constitutes the chief evidence
					for the sharply contested allegation that the rebellion began with a general
					massacre of Protestant settlers. As a result, this material has been central to
					protracted and bitter historical dispute.

				
This body of material, unparalleled elsewhere in Early Modern Europe, provides a
					unique source of information for the causes and events surrounding the 1641
					Rebellion and for the social, economic, cultural, religious, political and
					linguistic history of seventeenth-century Ireland, England and Scotland. In
					addition, the depositions vividly document various colonial and 'civilizing'
					processes, including the spread of Protestantism in one of the remotest regions
					of the Stuart kingdoms and the introduction of lowland agricultural and
					commercial practices, together with the native response to these
					developments.

				
Following the recent completion of a three year process of digitizing,
					transcribing and annotating the 1641 Depositions, the resulting Text Encoding
					Initiative (TEI) encoded corpus has become available for digital enhancement and
					analysis. The Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) of the United Kingdom
					has funded the next generation of research on this corpus under the auspices of
					their ‘Digital Equipment and Database Enhancement for Impact’ programme.
					‘Language and Linguistic Evidence in the 1641 Depositions’ is a
					multi-disciplinary Digital Humanities project designed to create an interactive
					computer environment in which scholars interested in historical linguistics,
					corpus analysis and forensic linguistics / discourse analysis can work together
					with historians, Early Modern prose scholars and other specialists to
					interrogate these valuable resources, exploiting new methods of personalization,
					visualization and collaboration.

				
The 1641 Collaborative Linguistic Research and Learning Environment (CLRLE) has
					been developed using Omeka, an open-source digital archival collections
					management system that has become a popular tool in the Digital Humanities for
					archiving, publishing and managing access to primary source materials such as
					documents, images, transcriptions and other multimedia resources (see 
http://omeka.org/
). Omeka
					is an ideal tool for exploring the concept of a collaborative research
					interface, since it doubles as a content management system and offers myriad
					possibilities for personalization and collaboration amongst users.

				
The resulting web-based portal houses fully searchable records of the 1641
					Depositions as ‘Items’ in various ‘Collections’, as is typical in Omeka-powered
					applications. Privileged users of the interface can collaboratively manage the
					archive and its content, editing Collections and Item metadata (e.g. deposition
					transcriptions, dates and deponent and commissioner names), annotating and
					tagging Items and contributing specialist content to public web pages on the
					site. 

				
A central part of this project has been knowledge exchange with IBM’s
					LanguageWare Research and Development Team. LanguageWare (
http://www.alphaworks.ibm.com/tech/lrw
) is IBM’s natural language
					processing software and is part of the Unstructured Information Management
					Architecture (UIMA) framework (
http://uima.apache.org/
). Researchers have addressed
					the challenge of applying this software (designed for contemporary language
					analysis) to the highly problematic “dirty data” of the 1641 corpus, with its
					propensity to variable spellings, morphologic instability and syntactic
					complexity. This has allowed the identification of important processes of
					linguistic change and has enabled linguists to trace the development of English
					in this unique Early Modern corpus. This involved the integration of a suite of
					software creating a domain-specific UIMA pipeline which offered a level of
					accuracy comparable to that achieved by manual annotators (Sweetnam and Fennell,
					2010). A crucial element of CLRLE will be the integration and exploitation of
					the results of this analysis.


				
A particularly valuable feature of the Omeka-powered CLRLE is the provision of an
					interactive Exhibit Builder tool enabling users to create personalized
					‘Exhibits’ of their research outcomes. These Exhibits draw together a highly
					extensible collection of reusable research objects, including transcribed
					depositions and associated metadata, dynamic visualizations, the outputs of
					statistical linguistic analyses and GIS displays. These Exhibits facilitate a
					high level of research cooperation and dissemination, and also have considerable
					pedagogical and outreach applications.


				
This poster charts the successful completion of a multi-disciplinary
					collaboration involving the adaptation and modification of new and evolving open
					source technologies for humanities research, significant knowledge exchange
					between industry and academia, and the interaction of a range of private and
					public institutions including the University of Aberdeen, Trinity College
					Dublin, Lancaster University, IBM LanguageWare and the Irish Digital Humanities
					Observatory (
http://dho.ie/
).
					The outcomes of this project offer valuable lessons for future undertakings in
					the Digital Humanities. CLRLE is an exemplar of the potential for the impact of
					modern technology and new methodologies on our understanding of historical
					resources and underlying processes and their continuing contemporary relevance. 


			
		
References:

			
				
					

						Sweetnam, Mark  Fennell, Barbara
						2010
						 “Natural Language Processing and Early Modern Dirty
							Data, ” 
						Proceedings of the Chicago Colloquium on
							Digital Humanities, 
					


					

						1641 Depositions Project, 
						Trinity College Dublin
						
         (
link
)
   
						15 Mar 2011
					

					

						TEI Consortium, (ed.)
						TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
							Interchange, 
						
         (
link
)
   
						30 Aug 2010
					

					

						Omeka. Version 1.2.1, 
						Center for History and New Media (CHNM), George Mason
							University
						
         (
link
)
   
						30 Aug 2010
					


				
			
		