Poster: Visualization of Co-occurrence Relationships Using the Historical Persons and Locational Names from Historical Documents

                    Itsubo, Sho, 
                    Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University,
                        Japan, 
                    
cm001061@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp

                

                    Osaki, Takahiko, 
                    Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University,
                        Japan, 
                    
cm003060@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp

                

                    Kimura, Fuminori, 
                    College of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan
                        University, Japan, 
                    
fkimura@is.ritsumei.ac.jp

                

                    Tezuka, Taro, 
                    College of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan
                        University, Japan, 
                    
tezuka@media.ritsumei.ac.jp

                

                    Maeda, Akira, 
                    College of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan
                        University, Japan, 
                    
amaeda@media.ritsumei.ac.jp

                
Introduction

                
In recent years, there is an increasing use of digital technology in the study of
                    humanities. Many historical documents are now digitally archived, enabling
                    further analysis using computers. There are archives that are accessible on the
                    World Wide Web, including Union Catalog of the Collections of the National Art
                    Museums, Japan (Independent Administrative Institution National Museum of Art,
                    2010) and Perseus Digital Library (Crane, 2011). 

                
Until recently, the storage of historical documents and data has been the main
                    target of digital archive research. There are, however, many works that go on to
                    analyze the content of the historical documents using text mining techniques. In
                    this paper, we propose a method of visualizing relationships among historical
                    persons using personal names and place names appearing in documents. 

            
            
                
Proposed Methods

                
We propose two methods to extract and visualize the relationships among persons
                    from historical documents. The goal of two methods is to extract dynamics of
                    relationships among historical persons. The first method tracks temporal change
                    in a relationship and visualizes it. The second method utilizes locational
                    information to obtain latent relationships among persons based on their spatial
                    activities.

            
            
                
Personal Relationships Using the Co-occurrence Information between
                    Persons

                
We use three historical documents in Japan, “Azumakagami”, “Gyokuyou” and
                    “Hyohanki”. “Azumakagami” is an official record written in Kamakura period
                    (A.D.1180-1266). “Gyokuyou” is a personal diary written by Kanezane Kujou
                    (A.D.1164-1200) in the late Heian period from early Kamakura period. “Hyohanki”
                    is a personal diary written by Nobunori Taira (A.D.1112-1187) in late Heian
                    period. We first extracted persons’ names using “Azumakagami” and “Gyokuyou”
                    databases (Fukuda, 2002) that contains an index of persons. This is because in
                    historical Japanese documents, persons are often referred to using other names
                    besides their real names. The index of persons includes such cases also. Since
                    the three historical documents are diaries, we defined co-occurrence to be the
                    case where two persons appearing in the same date. We calculated co-occurrence
                    frequencies among persons for each year.

            
            
                
Personal Relationships Using the Co-occurrence Information between Person and
                    Locational Information

                
In this method, we used “Hyohanki”. In the first step, we obtain frequencies of
                    co-occurrences between each person’s name and place names. Since “Hyohanki” is
                    written in ancient Japanese, we cannot attach part-of-speech tags using existing
                    morphological analyzers that were trained using modern Japanese. We therefore
                    used pattern matching to find place names that were included in the dictionary.
                    We used the “Index of Kyoto’s Place Names” created by Noboru Tani based on the
                    “Outline of Heiankyo” (Tsunoda, 1994) and “Japan’s Historical Place Names 27:
                    Place Names of Kyoto” (Hayashiya et al., 1979) as the data sources for place
                    names. 

                
We use co-occurrence as the indicator of the relationship between a person and a
                    location. If a person’s name and a place name appear in the same paragraph, we
                    consider it as a co-occurrence between the two. Since each paragraph often
                    covers a specific situation or a topic, we consider it to be a better unit than
                    dates. 

                
Each place name is considered as a dimension of a vector space. For each person,
                    we create a vector having the number of co-occurrences with a place name as the
                    component. For the similarity measure, we used cosine similarity. 

                
We use the similarity measure and the result of clustering for visualization. We
                    used JUNG, a Java open source library for drawing graph structure. 


            
            
                
Results of Visualization and Discussion

                
The result of visualizing temporal change in a relationship

                
Figure 1-3 show the results of visualization using the method described in
                    Subsection 2.1. 
Figure 1
 shows the change
                    in the relationships of Yoritomo Minamoto and Yoshitsune Minamoto to Emperor
                    Goshirakawa for seven years (from 1184 to 1190). 

                        
Fig. 1. Transition of relationships of Yoritomo Minamoto and
                            Yoshitsune Minamoto to Emperor Goshirakawa

                        
Full Size Image 

                     The horizontal axis is the co-occurrence frequency between Emperor
                    Goshirakawa and Yoritomo Minamoto, who became Shogun (the leader of samurai
                    warriors) in 1192. The vertical axis is the co-occurrence frequency between
                    Emperor Goshirakawa and Yoshitsune Minamoto, who is a younger brother and the
                    archrival of Yoritomo. The arrows indicate the transition based on
                    “Azumakagami”, while the dot arrows indicate the transition based on
                    “Gyokuyou”.
                
The result illustrates the change in the relationship among Yoritomo, Yoshitsune
                    and Emperor Goshirakawa. The change in 1184-1187 indicated by the arrow closely
                    resembles that of the blue allow. The change also matches well with the
                    historical fact. Transitions in 1187-1190 are different among two documents.
                    This is assumed to be due to the fact that “Azumakagami” is a diary written by
                    the Shogunate side and “Gyokuyou” is a diary written by the Imperial court side.
                    The relationship between Yoritomo Minamoto and Yoshitsune Minamoto, who were
                    both samurai warriors, are probably not described well enough in “Gyokuyou”.

                
Figure 2
 shows the change in the
                    relationships of Yoritomo Minamoto and Emperor Goshirakawa to Yoshiyasu Ichijou
                    for seven years (from 1185 to 1191). 

                        
Fig. 2. Transition of relationships of Yoritomo Minamoto and Emperor
                            Goshirakawa to Yoshiyasu Ichijou

                        
Full Size Image 

                     The horizontal axis is the co-occurrence frequency between Yoshiyasu
                    Ichijou and Yoritomo Minamoto. The vertical axis is the co-occurrence frequency
                    between Yoshiyasu Ichijou and Emperor Goshirakawa. The arrows indicate the
                    transition based on “Azumakagami”, while the dot arrows indicate the transition
                    based on “Gyokuyou”.
                
The result illustrates the change in the relationship among Yoritomo, Emperor
                    Goshirakawa and Yoshiyasu. Yoshiyasu is a person who was active on the emperor
                    side and the samurai side. Therefore, the relation between Yoritomo and Emperor
                    Goshirakawa is strong. However, the change is different in “Azumakagami” and
                    “Gyokuyou”.“Azumakagami” is the content of the samurai side and “Gyokuyou” is
                    the content of the emperor side. Figure 2 shows the feature of two historical
                    documents clearly.

                
Figure 3
 shows the change in the
                    relationships of Kiyomori Taira and Emperor Goshirakawa to Motofusa Fujiwara for
                    the six years (from 1166 to 1171). 

                        
Fig. 3. Transition of relationships of Kiyomori Taira and Emperor
                            Goshirakawa to Motofusa Fujiwara

                        
Full Size Image 

                     The horizontal axis is the co-occurrence frequency between Motofusa
                    Fujiwara and Kiyomori Taira. The vertical axis is the co-occurrence frequency
                    between Motofusa Fujiwara and Emperor Goshirakawa. The arrows indicate the
                    transition based on “Gyokuyou”, while the dot arrows indicate the transition
                    based on “Hyohanki”.
                
The result illustrates the change in the relationship among Kiyomori, Emperor
                    Goshirakawa and Motofusa. “Gyokuyou” is the content of the emperor side and the
                    author of “Hyohanki” is a person on the emperor side. Therefore, the contents of
                    two historical documents are similar and the transition of Figure 3 is also
                    similar. The results suggest the possibility of estimating author's standpoint
                    from the document.

            
            
                
The Result of Visualizing Latent Relationships using Locational
                    Information

                
Using our proposed method of 2.2, we created graphs that visualize relationships
                    between historical persons. We focused on the time range of Hougen Rebellion,
                    starting in early July 1156 and ending in late July of the same year.

                
Hougen Rebellion is a short civil war caused by a power struggle between Emperor
                    Goshirakawa and former Emperor Sutoku. 

                
We chose 78 persons belonging to either the faction following former Emperor
                    Sutoku or the faction following Emperor Goshirakawa (Hyohanki Reading Circle,
                    2007). Most of them are aristocrats and samurai warriors. It is distinguishable
                    from historical records to which faction each person belonged to. In “Hyohanki”,
                    31 of these persons had co-occurrence with location names. We used K = 3 for
                    K-means clustering and L = 20 for initialization. K is the number of clusters
                    used in K-means clustering. L is the number of repetitions for finding the
                    optimal initial centroids. 

                
Figure 4
 shows the result of visualization
                    using the similarity of co-occurring location names. 

                        
Fig. 4. Relationships among persons and historical factions

                        
Full Size Image 

                     The number next to the node and the color indicates to which faction
                    each person belonged to. A node labeled “1” (box) indicates that he followed
                    Sutoku. On the other hand, a node labeled “2” (circle) indicates that he
                    followed Goshirakawa. Lines are drawn when similarity is over 0.4. Dotted lines
                    indicate similarity between 0.4 and 0.7. Solid lines indicate similarity over
                    0.7. 
                
Figure 5
 shows the result of clustering.
                    The number next to each node indicates to which cluster the person was allocated
                    to. 

                        
Fig. 5. Result of clustering persons using locational
                            information

                        
Full Size Image 

                     Colors also indicate clusters. The cluster 1 is box, the cluster 2 is
                    circle, and the cluster 3 is triangle. 
Table
                        1
 shows to which cluster and to which faction each person belonged
                    to.
                

                    
Table. 1. Comparisons of factions and clusters

                    
Full Size Image 

                
                
We proposed a method of revealing and visualizing relationships among historical
                    persons by focusing on place names appearing in digitized historical documents.
                    We used cosine similarity and a modified K-means algorithm to create graphs and
                    cluster persons. 

                
In the experiments, we used persons that we know to which faction he belonged to
                    during the Hougen Rebellion. The result showed a strong correspondence between
                    the factions and the clusters, indicating effectiveness of using location
                    information for clustering people.

            
            
                
Conclusion

                
The results of our experiments showed that relationships between historical
                    persons can be extracted using historical documents. The experiment described in
                    Subsection 3.1 showed that temporal change of a relationship can be visualized
                    using change in co-occurrence frequencies. The experiment described in
                    Subsection 3.2 indicated a strong correspondence between the factions and the
                    clusters, indicating effectiveness of using location information for clustering
                    people.

            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Independent Administrative Institution National Museum of
                            Art
                        2010
                        Union Catalog of the Collections of the National Art Museums
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        14 March 2011
                    

                    

                        Crane,G.R.
                        2011
                        Perseus Digital Library
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        14 March 2011
                    

                    

                        Fukuda,T.
                        2002
                        Azumakagami-Gyokuyou Database
                    

                    

                        Tsunoda,B.
                        1994
                        The Outline of Heiankyo
                    

                    

                        Hayashiya,T.
                        Murai,Y.
                        Moriya,K.
                        1979
                        Japan’s Historical Place Names 27: Place Names of Kyoto
                    

                    

                        Sakai,M.
                        Yamada, S.
                        Onoda,T.
                        2010
                        Initialization of k-means method using independent component
                            analysis
                        The 24th annual meeting of the Japanese Society for Artificial
                            Intelligence
                    

                    

                        Hyohanki Reading Circle
                        2007
                        The Index of Hyohanki’s Persons’ Names
                    

                
            
        