Poster: Good Evidence is Hard to Find: Policy-based Approaches to Curating and
                    Preserving Digital Humanities Data

                    Marciano, Richard, 
                    University of North Carolina Chapel Hill USA, 
                    
richard_marciano@unc.edu

                

                    Hedges, Mark, 
                    King's College London, 
                    
mark.hedges@kcl.ac.uk

                

                    Chassanoff, Alexandra, 
                    University of North Carolina Chapel Hill USA, 
                    
achass@email.unc.edu

                

                    Aschenbrenner, Andreas, 
                

                    Hasan, Adil, 
                    English Department, University of Liverpool, UK, 
                
Blanke, Tobias, 
What does it mean to support scholarship in the 21st century? For the digital
                    humanist, scholarly needs range from providing long-term online access to
                    digitized collections to developing reusable tools to discern historical
                    patterns among large data corpuses. The so-called “age of evidentiary
                        abundance”O’Mally, Michel. "Evidence and Scarcity." [Weblog entry.]
                        The Aporetic. George Mason University. 02 Oct 2010.
                        (http://theaporetic.com/?p=176). 30 Oct 2010. yielded by linked data
                    and other technological advancements presents further interpretative challenges:
                    materials aggregated across collections need to merge content and context in a
                    seamless research environment. Supporting all of these endeavors over the long
                    term requires an efficient underlying structure to manage evolving technologies,
                    scholarship needs, and research requirements. This infrastructure must ensure
                    longevity and usability by attending to curation and preservation components.
                    Building sustainable research environments for the long term should be seen as a
                    core requirement of scholarly infrastructure in the digital age. 

                
In response to the Digital Humanities 2011 theme of “Big Tent Digital
                    Humanities”, this poster will demonstrate policy-based approaches to building
                    sustainable infrastructures for digital research environments. Drawing on our
                    work from key funded projects in the United States and Europe, including
                    Sustaining Heritage Access through Multivalent ArchiviNg (SHAMAN), DCAPE, and
                    Policy-Driven Repository Interoperability (PoDRI), we will showcase how policy-
                    based frameworks can be applied to both small-scale institutional collections
                    and to larger, federated multi-repository research environments. Our work
                    provides a model for how policy- driven curation and preservation policies can
                    be used to effectively manage digital humanities data. 

            
        