Paper: A Data Model for Visualising Textuality – The Würzburg Saint Matthew

                    Rehbein, Malte, 
                    Würzburg University, 
                    
malte.rehbein@uni-wuerzburg.de

                
Abstract

                
This short paper presents the ongoing work and the considerations behind the
                    project “Visualising Textuality – New Interfaces to Historical Texts”.

                
The project, supported by the EU FP7 Marie Curie Scheme, aims at implementing a
                    “knowledge environment” (Siemens et al) to explore and understand better early
                    medieval textual practices and pre-scholastic Christian scholarship. The project
                    starts from a manuscript from the University Library of Würzburg (M.p.th.f.61),
                    dated back to the second half of the 8th century AD and most likely of Irish
                    provenance. This is a parchment manuscript with 34 leaves containing a text of
                    Matthew’s gospel along with extensive interlinear glossing and 30 cedulae
                    (parchment slips) containing commentary material bound between the pages (
Fig. 1
).

                            
Fig. 1: Excerpt from M.p.th.f.61 with comments on parchment slips.

                            
Full Size Image 

                        
                
It is also an intriguing object of historical studies: its numerous glosses
                    (interlinear and marginal) as well as commentaries (on parchment slips) allow
                    insight into practices of compilation and use of this manuscript (cf. Fig. 1).
                    However, it poses many challenges to editors and researchers: different layers
                    of writing (strata) have been identified; the arrangement (mise-en-page) of
                    glosses and commentaries in relation to the Gospel text and to each other
                    conveys important information but is not easy to follow; the “intertexts” cross
                    the logical segments of the text and the physical boundaries and dimensions of
                    the document pages; the texts themselves, especially the commentaries, have
                    their own history of transmission; and they recite, vary from and refer to other
                    commentaries such as Eusebius, Jerome or Isidor, who also refer to other
                    commentaries and biblical texts etc. Cahill summarizes that the Würzburg Matthew
                    is “a complicated jumble and not a tidy bundle” and requires further research
                    (2002:25). His statement applies to all levels of investigation: the physical
                    (document), the logical (texts and contexts) and the level of space and time
                    (
cf. Fig. 2
).

                        
Fig. 2: Model illustration of the complex network of relations based on
                            the Würzburg glosses (not complete).

                        
Full Size Image 

                    
                
It is the aim of this research project to find adequate means for representing
                    such a complicated network of information, for visualising these relations and
                    for allowing the researcher to navigate through this data in form of a
                    “knowledge environment”. The fact that this all is a “complicated jumble” has to
                    be seriously taken into consideration. The data that is outlined here consists
                    of numerous combinations – of semantic relations, chronological dependencies,
                    spatial transmissions, topological information – each of which may carry an
                    important detail for research. What serves for the first time for an in-depth
                    and comprehensive research, has its risk in getting lost in information. Thus,
                    it seems to be crucial for the scholar to focus his or her attention up on what
                    (s)he is interested in. Support for this needs to be provided by the knowledge
                    environment.

                
The project is in the first year of its three years implementation plan. At the
                    time of the DH conference (June 2011), most of the textual work on the
                    manuscript shall be completed, so that preliminary considerations about the
                    setup of the envisaged knowledge environment and what is more important about
                    the underlying data model will be discussed and presented. This data model is an
                    abstraction of document, text and context and encompasses entities of different
                    types (such as segments of texts, zones in a document, time, space, scribes,
                    sources, metadata) and relations among them (such as “origins from”, “uses”,
                    “was written by”) as well the interface to external data (such as the Patrologia latina database) to link to text variants and
                    contexts.

            
        
References:

            
                

                    

                        Bischoff, B.
                         “Wendepunkte in der Geschichte der lateinischen Exegese im
                            Frühmittelalter, ” 
                        Sacris erudiri
                        6
                        1954
                        189-281
                    

                    

                        Cahill, M.
                         “The Würzburg Matthew: Status Quaestionis, ” 
                        Peritia
                        16
                        2002
                        1-25
                    

                    

                        Card, S.
                        J. MacKinlay
                        B. Shneiderman.
                        Readings in information visualization: Using vision to
                            think, 
                        1999
                    

                    

                        Chen, C.
                        Information Visualization: Beyond the Horizon, 
                        2007
                    

                    

                        Dahlström, M.
                        The Compleat Edition Text editing, print and the digital
                            world, 
                        27–44
                    

                    

                        Eggert, P.
                         “Text-encoding, Theories of the Text, and the
                            Work-Site, ” 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        20.4
                        2005
                        425-35
                    

                    

                        Flanders, J.
                         “The Productive Unease of 21st-century Digital
                            Scholarship, ” 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        3.3
                        2009
                    

                    

                        Gabler, H.
                         “The Primacy of the Document in Editing, ” 
                        Ecdotica, 
                        4
                        2007
                        197-207
                    

                    

                        Gervers, M.
                         “New Methods for the Analysis of Digitized Medieval Latin
                            Charters, ” 
                        Historisches Forum, 
                        10
                        2007
                        482-500
                    

                    

                        Gippert, J.
                        The Old Irish "Würzburg" Glosses, 
                        2002
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Gwynn, A.
                         “The Continuity of the Irish Tradition at Wurzburg, ” 
                        Herbipolis jubilans, 
                        1952
                        57-81
                    

                    

                        Kelly, J.
                         “The Würzburg Saint Matthew, ” 
                        Würzburger Diözesangeschichtsblätter, 
                        55
                        1993
                        5-12
                    

                    

                        Köberlin, K.
                        Eine Würzburger Evangelienhandschrift, 
                        1891
                    

                    

                        Ó Cróinín, D.
                         “Mo-Sinnu Moccu Min and the Computus of Bangor, ” 
                        Peritia, 
                        1
                        1982
                        281-95
                    

                    

                        Rehbein, M.
                         “Komplexe Textkritik in dynamischer Darstellung: Ein Modell
                            für digitale Texteditionen, ” 
                        HSR, 
                        24.1
                        1999
                        113-44
                    

                    

                        Robinson, P.
                         “The Ends of Editing, ” 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        3.3
                        2009
                    

                    

                        Schepss, Georg.
                        Die ältesten Evangelienhandschriften der Würzburger
                            Universitätsbibliothek, 
                        1887
                    

                    

                        Shillingsburg, P.
                        From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic representations of
                            literary texts, 
                        2006
                    

                    

                        Siemens, R. et al.
                         “Toward a Conceptual and Theoretical Foundation for New
                            Research on Books and Knowledge Environments, ” 
                        Digital Studies, 
                        1.2
                        2009
                    

                    

                        Stokes, W.
                         “The Old-Irish glosses at Würzburg and Carlsruhe, ” 
                        London: Philological Soc, , 1887.

                    

                        Sutherland, K.
                         “Being Critical: Paper-based Editing and the Digital
                            Environment, ” 
                        Text editing, print and the digital world, 
                        13–25
                    

                    

                        Teeuwen, M.
                         “The Impossible Task of Editing a Ninth-Century Commentary:
                            The Case of Martianus Capella, ” 
                        Variants, 
                        6
                    

                    

                        Thurneysen R.
                         “Das Alter der Würzburger Glossen, ” 
                        Zeitschrift für Celtische Philologie, 
                        3.1
                        1901
                        47-54
                    

                    

                        Tufte, E.
                        Envisioning information, 
                        2008
                    

                
            
        