 Panel: Networks, Literature, Culture

               Moretti, Franco, 
               Stanford University, 
               
moretti@stanford.edu

            

               Finn, Ed, 
               Stanford University, 
               
edfinn@stanford.edu

            

               Lewis, Rhiannon, 
               Stanford University, 
               
rmlewis@stanford.edu

            

               Frank, Zephyr, 
               Stanford University, 
               
zfrank@stanford.edu

            

         
            
               
Overview: Our panel proposal, and the three individual papers, present work in
                  progress at the Stanford Literary Lab, a work space opened in the Fall of 2010
                  where faculty and students conduct research of a digital and quantitative nature.
                  Ideally, we try to generate critical “experiments” that mix archival exploration
                  and hypothesis testing, and extend over a period of one-two years; all of them
                  collaborative, and developing through regular group meetings that evaluate results
                  and plan the work to come. 

            
         
      
Reading, Writing and Reputation: Literary Networks in Contemporary American
                  Fiction

                  Finn, Ed, 
                  Stanford University, 
                  
edfinn@stanford.edu

               
Overview


               
Long-established models of literary production are changing dramatically as the
                  digital era continues to blur, and at times erase, the divisions between authors,
                  critics and readers. Millions of cultural consumers are now empowered to
                  participate in previously closed literary conversations and to express forms of
                  mass distinction through their purchases and reviews. My project argues that these
                  traces of popular reading choices constitute a fresh perspective on elusive
                  audience reactions to literature, one that reveals distinct networks of
                  conversation that are transforming previously well-understood relationships
                  between writers and their readers, between the art of fiction and the market for
                  books (Radway). Employing network analysis methodologies and ‘distant reading’ of
                  book reviews, recommendations and other digital traces of cultural distinction
                  (Moretti), my research develops new models for studying literary culture in
                  America today. In this paper I consider the reception of three mid-career writers,
                  David Foster Wallace, Junot Díaz and Colson Whitehead, asking how they have
                  redefined authorial expectations and literary identity through their work. 

            
            
               
Background 


               
My project is founded on the argument that as literary production evolves, new
                  kinds of reading communities and collaborative cultural entities are emerging.
                  Many of these communities are ephemeral and quite often they are fostered by
                  commercial interests seeking to capitalize on their cultural production.
                  Nevertheless, a handful of websites like Amazon continue to dominate the
                  marketplace for books and attract millions of customer reviews, ratings and
                  purchase decisions, and the literary ecologies of these book reviews have become
                  valuable research resources. The ideational networks I explore are made up of
                  books, authors, characters and other literary entities (these are the nodes),
                  along with the references linking them together as collocations in book reviews,
                  suggestions from recommendation engines, and other structures of connection. As my
                  project has moved from Thomas Pynchon and Toni Morrison to the younger generation
                  represented by Wallace, Díaz and Whitehead, I have improved my data-gathering and
                  network analysis methodologies. With new data and better tools, I hope to
                  determine how the game of authorial fame is changing in an increasingly reflexive,
                  networked literary landscape. 

            
            
               
Proposal 


               
This paper will present my research on three younger writers who have broken new
                  ground in literary constructions of identity in a shifting landscape of reception.
                  Wallace, Díaz and Whitehead, all members of “Generation X,” are writers who have
                  captured national attention through particularities of self-presentation and
                  novelistic style. 


               
I argue that these authors signal a sea change in literary reputation. Authors as
                  well as publishers are now interacting with active communities of readers who
                  conduct complex cultural conversations independent of traditional arbiters of
                  taste. As the barriers separating readers from ordained critics crumble online,
                  younger authors are increasingly engaging with audiences that are both
                  collaborative and vocal. Tracing the half-spun career arcs of Wallace, Díaz and
                  Whitehead, this paper articulates a new model of contemporary literary culture: a
                  reading society that demands increasing authorial reflexivity to mirror the
                  collaborative, iterative nature of digital literary conversations. 


               
Each author makes a distinct form of literary identity central to his work. David
                  Foster Wallace defined a deeply introspective and reflexive narrative voice,
                  pioneering a style so individual that he ultimately felt it had become clichéd and
                  struggled to escape it in his final years of writing. In his breakout novel The Brief, Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, Junot Díaz has
                  tackled the challenges of his hybrid Dominican/American identity by creating a new
                  argot of Spanglish phrases, pop cultural references and an ingenious deployment of
                  footnotes to both buttress and undermine normative American understandings of
                  Latin American history and culture. Finally, Colson Whitehead has similarly
                  inverted expectations for African American authors, accomplishing the seemingly
                  impossible feat of writing in the traditions of both Toni Morrison and Thomas
                  Pynchon. As a group, these writers have little in common except their age,
                  positions of cultural prestige and their talents as re-inventors of literary
                  identity. This makes them excellent subjects for a study of contemporary literary
                  reception and the collective construction of literary identities. 

            
            
               
Methodology 


               
The project draws on two primary datasets: first, a corpus of professional and
                  consumer book reviews collected from nationally prestigious reviewing newspapers
                  and magazines along with consumer reviews from Amazon dating back to 1996; second,
                  networks of recommendations based on consumer purchases and book ownership drawn
                  from the websites Amazon and LibraryThing. Comparing these different literary
                  networks allows me to make broader arguments about contemporary authorial fame and
                  the changing role of the everyday reader in literary conversations. 


               
For the first dataset, consumer and professional book reviews, I have employed the
                  MorphAdorner project’s Named Entity Recognition tool to create a dictionary of
                  literary proper nouns (authors, titles, character names, etc). This dictionary was
                  used to identify collocations on a paragraph level throughout these reviews,
                  making nouns into nodes and collocations into links. This approach allows me to
                  empirically identify and visualize those authors and texts frequently mentioned in
                  the same review contexts. The resulting noun networks reveal not only the
                  distinctions between everyday readers and more traditional arbiters of literary
                  taste but the ways in which popular authors are increasingly carrying on multiple
                  independent and complex literary conversations. 


               
The second dataset combines book recommendations provided by Amazon’s “Customers
                  who bought this also bought” engine and LibraryThing’s recommendation engine. In
                  this case books form the nodes and recommendations the links connecting them.
                  Employing network analysis to identify patterns of prestige and clustering in
                  these recommendation networks has allowed me to trace the diverse functions of
                  genre and authorial identity in ordering literary texts and to identify the basic
                  rules of contemporary market canonicity. 

            
            
               
Conclusion 


               
As I have moved this project through its first two case studies, with Pynchon and
                  Morrison, I have refined a hybrid methodology that explores literary and cultural
                  context through a limited empirical lens, considering particular digital and
                  textual networks of reference and evaluation. This iteration of the process takes
                  on three authors with very different styles to ask how a younger literary
                  generation is working together with newly empowered readers to construct new kinds
                  of multiply mediated, widely collaborative forms of cultural identity. By studying
                  these writers mid-career, I hope to trace both the evolution of contemporary
                  authorial fame and its relationship to wider systems of social distinction in a
                  rapidly evolving digital landscape. 

            
         

         
References:

            
               
                  
Bourdieu, P.
                     1993
                     The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and
                        Literature., 
                     Randal Johnson
                     New York
                     Columbia University Press
                  


                  
English, J.
                     2005
                     The Economy of Prestige, 
                     Cambridge, MA
                     Harvard University Press
                  


                  
Guillory, J.
                     1993
                     Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon
                        Formation, 
                     Chicago
                     University of Chicago Press
                  


                  
Moretti, F.
                     2005
                     Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstracted Models for a Literary
                        History, 
                     London and New York
                     Verso


                  
MorphAdorner.
                     Northwestern University
                     2009
                     
         (
link
)
   
                  


                  
Radway, J.
                     1997
                     A Feeling for Books: The Book-of-the-Month Club, Literary
                        Taste, and Middle-Class Desire, 
                     Chapel Hill
                     University of North Carolina Press
                  


                  
yEd Graph Editor
                     yWorks GmbH
                     2010
                     
         (
link
)
   
                  


               
            
         
      
Paper Two: Plot as Network: Quantifying the Evolution of Dramatic
                  Style

                  Lewis, Rhiannon, 
                  Stanford University, 
                  
rmlewis@stanford.edu

               
In the last decade or so, quantitative evidence has become part of literary study
                  in a variety of ways – from the material realities of book history [library
                  holdings, or translation flows], to the linguistic macro-patterns that have
                  renewed the study of attribution, genre differentiation, and stylistics. Plot,
                  however, has proved much more difficult to quantify. This paper looks for a
                  possible solution in network theory, whose concepts re-define plot as a system
                  where characters are the vertices, and their interactions the edges of a narrative
                  network. Focusing, for now, on dramatic literature, such "network
                  narratology" brings to light the striking discontinuities between the
                  structure of ancient and Renaissance tragedy, and suggests a reconceptualization
                  of literary characters in terms of their "connectedness" and their
                  position within the network. 


               
This paper grew out of Franco Moretti’s network analysis of three Shakespeare
                  plays: Hamlet, Macbeth, and King Lear. Preliminary work for the project included
                  php-extraction of speaker-receiver data from MIT’s xml-encoded Shakespeare corpus.
                  The program R was then used to generate network analyses. A
                  team of Stanford graduate students hand-corrected receiver attributions to a level
                  of 100% accuracy. The paper’s methodological component discusses the difficulties
                  of automated recipient attribution in dramatic texts, and touches on issues of
                  “quantifying” performance literature, including plays lacking an authoritative
                  text. The idea of (performance) time turned into space is grounded in narrative
                  theory: specifically, Alex Woloch’s concept of a character-system made of many character-spaces (The One vs. the
                     Many). In addition to modeling “plot as network” based in dialogue, I also
                  utilize stage directions to map networks as shared “space.” Here, space includes
                  more ambiguous character presence such as disguised identity and
                  plays-within-plays, as well as the auditory presence of eavesdropping. Thus,
                  overlapping networks of character position -- both physical and verbal -- model
                  multiple dimensions of plot through form and performance. 


               
The paper draws on extant and original corpora of over 70 plays, from classical
                  through Renaissance drama. They include Shakespeare’s complete dramatic works, as
                  well as select plays by Marlowe, Jonson, and Webster. The classical plays are
                  drawn from Project Perseus’ database. Evaluating our script’s performance across
                  literary periods has revealed that classical dramatic dialogue follows a linear
                  progression more frequently than dialogue in Renaissance drama. In other words,
                  the script always assumes that Speaker A will address Speaker B who addresses
                  Speaker C, etc, and therefore inaccurately assigns the receiver when Speaker B
                  responds back to Speaker A. Here, methodology illuminates dramatic structure. The
                  linear model of “progressive” dialogue correctly attributes a higher percentage of
                  utterances (and words) in Greek than Shakespearean tragedy. Dialogue in ancient
                  plays more strictly observes a recursive model that occurs less frequently within
                  Shakespeare’s more populated scenes. The script correctly identifies more receiver
                  tags in plays with smaller casts (i.e., classical drama) and scenes with two
                  interlocutors, such as Iago and Roderigo in Othello I.i.
                  When there are more than two interlocutors, the script misattributes a response to
                  a previous speaker as an address to the following speaker. However, accuracy is
                  usually measured at the unit of the utterance, or speech-tag. When measuring
                  accuracy by words, Act I of Othello presents a different
                  case. Word-based accuracy is consistently lower than utterance-based accuracy in
                  the Greek plays and in Hamlet, but in Othello, the reverse is true. Thus, inaccurately attributed
                  speeches—those given in response to a preceding speech--are longer in Hamlet and the Greek plays than in the opening act of Othello. It follows that in Othello,
                  characters tend to say more when they address the next character who speaks. If
                  there's more chain-like dialogic progress in Act I of Othello than in all of Hamlet, this corroborates
                  scene-based thematics that characterize Othello: its
                  beginning in medias res and the transmission of news
                  through increasingly public scenes (from “a street” (I.i) to “another street”
                  (I.ii) to “a council-chamber” (I.iii)). In the second section of this paper I
                  explore such network patterns diachronically: at levels of scene, act and play,
                  and in comparative context. 


               
This formal figuration of dialogue’s progress supplements the paper’s central
                  findings: weighted network visuals, at levels of the play entire, act and scene.
                  At the most macroscopic level, we observe “synchronic” patterns and
                  discontinuities: for example, larger scenes, with more characters and therefore
                  usually a more “public” nature occur near the beginning and the ending of Hamlet, Lear, and Othello. Networks create a hierarchy of centrality among characters. This
                  model inevitably calls into question the binaries with which we usually think
                  about characters: protagonist vs. minor characters, or "round" vs.
                  "flat": nothing here supports these dichotomies, and, in fact, the
                  hierarchical re-conceptualization of characters is another promising research area
                  opened by network theory. 


               
The third section focuses not on character as determined by location in narrative
                  structure, but by semantic analysis of dialogue, using word frequency and semantic
                  field analysis. For example, relativized word frequency lists reveal that “Cassio”
                  is among the top ten most frequent words that Brabantio, the Duke, Lodovico and
                  Montano speak, before any other character’s name, including “Othello,”
                  “Desdemona,” or “Iago.” This semantic analysis detects the linguistic virulence of
                  Iago’s revenge scheme, “promoting” Cassio’s name in the constructed adultery plot.
                  Semantic analysis and weighted word networks also reveal that antagonists’
                  confrontations are consistently verbose in Greek tragedy, while Shakespearean
                  antagonists may never exchange a word. In this paper, I consider dramatic plot as
                  a function of network connections--coded as relations between speaker and
                  addressee—through both historical and generic developments. 

            
         

         
References:

            

               
                  

                     Albert-László Barabási,
                     Linked, 
                     Penguin
                     NY
                     2003
                  


                  
Mark Granovetter,
                      “The Strength of Weak Ties, ” 
                     American Journal of Sociology, 
                     May 1973
                  


                  
R. Alberich
                     J. Miro-Julia
                     F. Rosselló
                      “Marvel Universe looks almost like a real network, ” 
                     
         (
link
)
   
                  


                  
M. E. J. Newman
                      “Finding community structure in networks using the eigenvectors
                        of matrices, ” 
                     Physical Review E 74, 
                     036104
                     2006
                  


                  
M. E. J. Newman
                      “The Structure and Function of Complex Networks, ” 
                     SIAM Review, 
                     2003


                  

                     Mark Newman
                     Albert-László Barabási
                     Duncan J. Watts
                     The Structure and Dynamics of
                        Networks, 
                     Princeton UP
                     2006
                  


                  
Mark Steyvers
                     Joshua Tenenbaum
                      “The Large-Scale Structure of Semantic Networks:
                        Statistical Analyses and a Model of Semantic Growth, ” 
                     Cognitive Science, 
                     29
                     2005
                  


                  
James Stiller
                     Daniel Nettle
                     Robin I.M. Dunbar
                      “The small world of Shakespeare's plays, ” 
                     Human Nature, 
                     vol. 14, no. 4
                     2003

               
            
         
      
Social Connections and Space in Nineteenth-Century Rio de Janeiro

                  Frank, Zephyr, 
                  Stanford University, 
                  
zfrank@stanford.edu

               
This paper explores the theme of social connections in the novels of Machado de
                  Assis, José de Alencar, and Aluísio Azevedo against a background of empirical
                  research on historical social networks in the space of the city of Rio de Janeiro.
                  It argues that a better understanding of the meaning and configuration of social
                  networks in history can be obtained through creative use of literary sources. In
                  this, the paper builds upon the work of Antonio Candido, Roberto Schwarz, and
                  Raymundo Faoro—all of whom emphasized the historical and sociological richness in
                  the works of the novelists under consideration. By emphasizing the physical space
                  of the city, its street networks and modes of transport, and the existence of
                  overlapping social networks therein, the paper connects sociologically inflected
                  literary criticism to social history through the use of new digital methods of
                  analysis and visualization.


               
 The body of the paper is divided into two parts. The first part analyzes networks
                  within the novels and the novelistic space of the city. The second part, building
                  on the network typologies and spaces discovered in the analysis of the novels,
                  explores social networks and the space of the city through the analysis of
                  historical documents such as lists of club members or occupational groupings. The
                  paper then concludes with an appraisal of the way literary networks and spaces can
                  inform better historical questions put to more traditional historical documents. 


               
 In terms of digital humanities methods, the paper explores the use of
                  computational techniques and programs such as GIS (ArcGIS and related software)
                  and Gephi, a network analysis tool. Part of the novelty of the approach considered
                  in this paper is the degree to which it combines analysis across these
                  platforms—that is, network space (Gephi) and geographical space (ArcGIS) taken
                  together. Because it is difficult to describe the approach taken in the paper in
                  words alone, two examples of the kinds of visualization generated for the paper
                  are shown to the right. 


               

                     
Epitaph of a Small Winner

                     
Full Size Image 

                   Machado de Assis’s novel (1881) is told in the first person by a voluble
                  narrator. Connections to the central character (red node) shoot off in multiple
                  directions as the book zig-zags through his life (which can be read, loosely, as a
                  Bildungsroman of Brazil personified in the character of Brás Cubas). The structure
                  of the novel thereby reflects the author’s critique of the capricious and
                  fragmented world of Rio de Janeiro. Still, in the midst of all this fragmentation,
                  certain characters and places emerge as brokers and spaces of social connections. 

               

                     
Sonhos d’Ouro

                     
Full Size Image 

                   José de Alencar’s novel (1872) is told in a traditional third-person
                  style. The central character (red node) is surrounded by characters of similar
                  importance (measured by network centrality). There are relatively few network
                  clusters and far fewer characters and complications than in the case of Machado’s
                  novel. The plot of Alencar’s novel seeks to resolve the tension between newly
                  minted capitalist wealth and values of thrift and honor embodied in the
                  protagonist. 
               

                     
Full Size Image 

                  
               
The second part of the paper explores what happens when we place historical
                  individuals in the context of social networks and the spaces of the city. Using
                  information gleaned from the analysis of networks in novels, including the role of
                  “brokers” and “spaces of interaction,” part two looks for evidence of similar
                  patterns of social connections and spaces in the historical record.

               
 As in the example provided in the diagram above, it is possible to reconstruct
                  the shape of social networks in nineteenth-century Rio de Janeiro through the
                  collection of data concerning club and organization membership and the analysis of
                  large datasets with tools such as Gephi and Pajek (used above). There is a clear
                  pecking order in the organizations of the civic fauna in Rio. Just a few leaders
                  are required, for example, to tie together 90 percent of the civic fauna in first-
                  or second-degree connections. The same emphasis on hierarchy and gatekeeping with
                  respect to social connections appears in the analysis of the novels discussed with
                  respect to the first part of the paper. 

            
         
      