 Panel: The Social Networks and Archival Context Project

               Pitti, Daniel, 
               Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities, University of
                  Virginia, 
               
dpitti@Virginia.edu

            

               Larson, Ray, 
               University of California, Berkeley. School of Information, 
               
ray@ischool.berkeley.edu

            

               Janakiraman, Krishna, 
               University of California, Berkeley. School of Information, 
               
krishna.j@berkeley.edu

            

               Tingle, Brian, 
                California Digital Library, 
               
brian.tingle.cdlib.org@gmail.com

            

         
            
               
This session will present an interim report on the findings and a demonstration of
                  the Social Networks and Archival Context (SNAC) project. 

               
SNAC is exploring the feasibility of using existing archival descriptions to
                  create a prototype socio-historical resource and resource discovery tool that will
                  enhance access to and understanding of cultural resources in archives, libraries,
                  and museums. Beginning in May 2010, with funding from the National Endowment for
                  the Humanities, the two-year project is using advanced technology in three primary
                  ways: to derive descriptions of people from descriptions of their records; to
                  match and merge the derived records with library and museum authority records; and
                  to build a prototype socio-historical resource and access system use the resulting
                  matched and combined records. 

               
Leveraging the new standard Encoded Archival Context–Corporate Bodies, Persons,
                  and Families (EAC-CPF), the project is deriving EAC-CPF records from nearly 30,000
                  EAD-encoded finding aids made available to the project by the Library of Congress
                  and three archival consortia: Online Archive of California; Northwest Digital
                  Archive; and Virginia Heritage. Names of record creators and of people documented
                  in the records and record descriptions are being used to create EAC-CPF records.
                  Co-occurrence of names in finding aids is also being recorded in order to document
                  social and professional relations among named entities and to interrelate (or
                  link) the related records with one another. The resulting EAC-CPF records are
                  matched against one another and against several million authority records
                  represented in the Library of Congress Name Authority File (NACO/LCNAF), the Getty
                  Vocabulary Program's Union List of Artist Names (ULAN), and the Virtual
                  International Authority File (VIAF), a collaboration between several national
                  libraries. Unique data in matching records is being merged or combined into a
                  single EAC-CPF record, with the ultimate goal of having one record for each unique
                  person, corporate body, for family. Finally, the project is developing a prototype
                  public access and historical resource system based on the unique EAC-CPF records
                  created from the processing. 


               
SNAC is a collaboration between three institutions: the Institute for Advanced
                  Technology in the Humanities (IATH), University of Virginia; the California
                  Digital Library (CDL), University of California; and the School of Information,
                  University of California, Berkeley (SI/UCB). IATH is the lead institution and is
                  responsible for overall project management and for deriving EAC-CPF records from
                  EAD-encoded finding aids. SI/UCB is responsible for the matching and merging of
                  authority records. CDL is responsible for developing a prototype public access and
                  historical resource system based on the data produced by the other two partners. 


               
The three papers presented in the session will cover the following topics: A
                  comprehensive overview of SNAC and a detailed description of the derivation
                  processing; a description of the theoretical and application challenges of
                  matching data from heterogeneous sources; and a description of the methods and
                  technology being adapted or developed to create the prototype public system.
                  Finally, the session will present a brief demonstration of the prototype system.
               

            
         
      
Overview and
                  Methods

                  Pitti, Daniel, 
                  Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities, University of
                     Virginia, 
                  
dpitti@Virginia.edu

               
Introduction 


               
Archivists have a long history of describing the people who—acting individually,
                  in families, or in formally organized groups—create and are documented in archival
                  records. They research and describe the artists, scholars, political leaders,
                  scientists, government agencies, soldiers, universities, businesses, families, and
                  others who create and are represented in the items that are now part of our shared
                  cultural legacy. However, because archivists have traditionally described records
                  and the people documented in them in a single apparatus, the finding aid, this
                  biographical-historical information is tied to specific resources and
                  institutions. Currently there is no system in place that aggregates these
                  descriptions of individual persons, families, and corporate bodies, and
                  interrelates them to reveal the professional and social relations that existed
                  among the described entities. 


               
Leveraging the new standard Encoded Archival Context–Corporate Bodies, Persons,
                  and Families (EAC-CPF), the Social Networks and Archival
                     Context (SNAC) project is exploring the feasibility of using existing
                  archival descriptions in new ways in order to enhance access to and understanding
                  of cultural resources in archives, libraries, and museums. Beginning in May 2010,
                  with funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the two-year project
                  is using advanced technology to derive descriptions of people from descriptions of
                  their records, to match and merge the derived records with library and museum
                  authority records, and use the resulting records to build a prototype
                  socio-historical resource and access system. 

            

            
               
Data and Data Contributing Institutions 


               
Over 28,000 EAD-encoded finding aids have been made available to the project by
                  the Library of Congress (918+) and three archival consortia: the Online Archive of
                  California (13,932+); Northwest Digital Archive (5,160+), and Virginia Heritage
                  (8,390+). The three consortia represent findings from over 200 individual
                  repositories. 


               
A key criterion in selecting the finding aid sources was geographical proximity.
                  Because archives commonly emphasize local history, it is surmised that the
                  geographic proximity of the archives would yield a higher rate of co-referencing
                  (for example, a correspondent in one finding aid is the creator in another), and
                  thus provide corroborating evidence of social-professional relations. Another very
                  important consideration was encoding consistency, and thus the project emphasized
                  consortia with high quality control standards. 


               
Three institutions are contributing authority records that will be matched and
                  merged with the derived EAC-CPF records. The Library of Congress has made the
                  NACO/Library of Congress Name Authority File (LCNAF) available for project use
                  (3.8M personal and 900K corporate name records). The Getty Vocabulary Program has
                  contributed the Union List of Artist Names (ULAN) (293K personal and corporate
                  names). Finally, OCLC Research has made available the subset of the Virtual
                  International Authority File (VIAF) that intersects with the LCNAF available to
                  the project. The VIAF, for now, only contains personal names. 

            
            
               
Separating Description of People from Description of Records 


               
There are several interrelated intellectual and practical rationales for
                  separating the descriptions of people from the description of the records that
                  document their lives. These rationales are based on archival processing
                  efficiencies, the intellectual quality and depth of resource description, and
                  enhanced access to primary humanities resources for all users. 


               
Cooperative Authority Control. Authority control is
                  labor-intensive, and sharing the creation, maintenance, and use of authority data
                  improves catalogers’ productivity. Sharing descriptions of creators and people and
                  organizations documented in archival records saves time and labor. 


               
Integrated Access to and Context for Cultural Heritage.
                  Integrated, union access to archival authority records can be used to locate and
                  identify people, organizations, and families, and these records in turn can lead
                  to cultural heritage resources through links to descriptions or dynamically
                  generated searches of catalogs. An archival authority record can provide not just
                  contextual information for understanding archival resources, but also access to
                  and context for understanding all that constitutes the human record and our
                  cultural heritage. 


               
Biographical/Historical Resource. In addition to name
                  control, archival authority records provide biographical/historical data about the
                  creator, such as when and where the creator existed, significant activities and
                  functions performed by the creator, and other significant dates, places, and
                  events. This historical information can be used as an independent resource that
                  can assist users in identifying and learning about the described entity. 


               
Social/Historical Context. People live and work with other
                  people, both as individuals and as members of families and organizations. These
                  social and professional relations are reflected in records created by them and
                  consequently in the descriptions of the records. Archival authority control
                  records provide a potential means to systematically gather and document these
                  social and professional relations in links that interrelate descriptions of
                  people, organizations, and families. This documentation can provide convenient
                  access to the broad social-historical contexts within which corporate bodies,
                  persons, and families were active, and convenient, navigable access to related or
                  complementary resources. 

            

            
               
Methods and Processing Overview 


               
There are three ways in which technology is being used in the SNAC Project. First,
                  using Extensible Markup Language–Transformation (XSLT), the project is deriving
                  EAC-CPF records from EAD-encoded finding aids for record creators and people
                  referenced in the description The co-occurrence of names in the description
                     of a single collection documents either a social-professional or intellectual
                     relation between the named entities. Some occurrences can specifically be
                     identified as correspondents, thus confirming a social-professional
                     relation.. Initially the project is focusing on extracting names,
                  biographical-historical data, occupations, dates of existence, and languages used
                  that are clearly and specifically encoded in the finding aids. Later in the
                  project, natural language processing techniques will be used to experiment with
                  extracting names and other targeted descriptive data that appear in the
                  description but that are not encoded specifically. Second, the extracted EAC-CPF
                  records are being matched against one another and against NACO/Library of Congress
                  Name Authority File (LCNAF) records, Union List of Artist Names (ULAN) authority
                  records, and finally Virtual International Authority File (VIAF) aggregated
                  authority records. Unique data in matching records is being merged or combined
                  into a single EAC-CPF record. Finally, the project is developing a prototype
                  public access and socio-historical resource system based on the collection of
                  unique EAC-CPF records created and interrelated. 


               
This paper will address the first step in the processing, deriving EAC-CPF records
                  from archival finding aids. The matching and merging and development of the
                  prototype system will be addressed in separate papers. 

            

            
               
Deriving EAC-CPF Records 


               
The principal technologies involved in the derivation process are XSLT 2.0 and
                  XPath 2.0, with relatively heavy use of regular expressions and customized
                  functions. Initially in the project, the focus is on identifying and deriving
                  individual records from the following EAD tag components: <persname>,
                  <corpname>, and <famname> that occur within <origination>,
                  <controlaccess>, and <unittitle>. Personal, corporate, and family
                  names derived from <origination> and <controlaccess> are generally
                  formulated according to strict cataloging rules (AACR2, for American archives and
                  libraries), though challenges are presented by names that are poorly formulated
                  (for example, in direct rather than inverted order, and intermixed with non-name
                  data, subject subdivisions or uniform titles). While many names occurring within
                  <unittitle> are tagged as such, many occur without being tagged as names.
                  The tagged names found in <unittitle>, like those found in
                  <controlaccess>, are irregularly formatted. Regular customized functions and
                  named templates, many incorporating the use of regular expressions, are used to
                  isolate and normalize the name strings, and to create unique lists of names. 


               
For each unique name string found, an EAC-CPF record is created. For records
                  derived for creators, additional descriptive data for dates of existence,
                  occupation, subject headings assigned to records, languages used, and
                  biographical-historical information is extracted into the corresponding EAC-CPF
                  records. Additionally, all unique referenced names are related to the EAC-CPF
                  record for the creator, and for each an EAC-CPF record is also created, and
                  related to the record for the creator. Because of co-referencing among finding
                  aids (for example, the same person corresponded with two more record creators),
                  the resulting set of records derived from any set of finding aids contains more
                  than one EAC-CPF record describing the same entity. Thus while duplicate entries
                  are not created for named entities found in a particular finding aid, duplicate
                  or, more accurately, matching records are created in the processing of all of the
                  finding aids. 

            

            
               
Conclusion 


               
While SNAC has only been underway for five months, the Library of Congress, Online
                  Archive of California, and Northwest Digital Archive finding aids have been
                  processed to derive nearly 160,000 EAC-CPF records. The matching and merging
                  processing at SI/UCB began in September 2010, after several weeks devoted to
                  acquiring and indexing several million VIAF, ULAN, and LCNAF authority records in
                  preparation for the matching and merging processing. The initial release of the
                  prototype public historical resource and access system was in December 2011.
                  Though many challenges remain, the early results suggest that the data and the
                  methods and techniques being applied are highly effective. The deriving, and
                  matching and merging processing will continue to be refined, and the prototype
                  public system will continue to be refined and new features developed. 

            
         
      
Matching and
                  Merging EAC-CPF Records

                  Larson, Ray, 
                  University of California, Berkeley. School of
                     Information, 
                  
ray@ischool.berkeley.edu

               

                  Janakiraman, Krishna, 
                  University of California, Berkeley. School of
                     Information, 
                  
krishna.j@berkeley.edu

               
Introduction 


               
Our interests in cultural heritage, history, and the social sciences are
                  fundamentally about human activities. Understanding the circumstances of people’s
                  actions—who, what, when, how, and why—illuminates their lives and the events that
                  they experienced. While much information of interest to scholars is already
                  available in the collections of cultural institutions such as archives and
                  libraries, there is a significant gap in the information infrastructure for
                  dealing with information about people. Standards for the computerized handling
                  people’s names have been developed in libraries (such as MARC Authorities). With
                  the development of the EAC-CPF (Encoded Archival Context–Corporate Bodies,
                  Persons, and Families) standard, a similar capability is just now becoming
                  available to archival collections. The Social Networks and Archival Collections
                  (SNAC) project aims to start bridging that gap and to connect the information
                  about corporate bodies, persons and families in the library world with those
                  entities in the archival world. 


               
This paper reports on current experiments in matching and merging entities in
                  collections of EAC-CPF records with those in library authority files and other
                  sources. EAC-CPF records represent the entities (which can be individuals or
                  groups of individuals) mentioned in archival description records and can be
                  derived from the EAD (Encoded Archival Description) records that encode
                  description of archival collections. EAD records, created by archivists and
                  librarians, serve as vital finding aids. Information on entities in these records
                  is an invaluable reference for humanities scholars, particularly since entities
                  may be referenced and represented in multiple archival descriptions. 


               
EAC-CPF records encode extensive information about an entity, drawn from various
                  parts of the source records. In addition to basic identifying information (name,
                  type, occupation(s), and existence dates), they include an entity’s
                  relationship(s) with other entities, resources, and works. Since EAC-CPF records
                  are derived independently from each EAD record, there can be multiple records
                  representing the same entity in multiple EAD collections. A key problem, then, is
                  to identify multiple EAC-CPF records that represent the same entity and merge them
                  together into a single record. 


               
SNAC has been given an extensive collection of library Name Authority records,
                  including the Library of Congress Name Authority File (LCNAF), the Virtual
                  International Authority File (VIAF) from OCLC Research, and the Union List of
                  Artists Names (ULAN) from the Getty Vocabulary Program. The VIAF database combines
                  name authority files from a number of libraries worldwide, including the Library
                  of Congress, La Bibliothèque nationale de France, Deutsche Nationalbibliothek, and
                  the Vatican Library. SNAC’s current implementations use either an exact string
                  match criteria or the alternate name information from the name authority files to
                  match entities in the EAC-CPF collection. 

            
            
               
Related Work 


               
Our problem is similar to the well-studied entity name disambiguation problem,
                  where the task is to identify the correct entity, under a given context, from a
                  set of seemingly identical entities. Standard approaches use statistical learning
                  techniques, either performing supervised learning and train classifiers that
                  predict the relevance of an entity given a context or performing unsupervised
                  learning and design clustering techniques that cluster similar entities together.
                  As an example of the former, Bunescu and Pasca (Bunescu and Pasca, 2006) suggest a
                  method that trains Support Vector Machines (SVM) classifiers to disambiguate
                  entities using the Wikipedia corpus. The classifier was trained using features
                  extracted from the title, hyperlinks linking other entities, categories assigned
                  to the entity and Wikipedia’s redirect and disambiguate pages. Bagga and Baldwin
                  (Bagga and Baldwin, 1998) and Mann and Yarowsky (Mann and Yarowsky, 2003) are
                  examples of the latter technique, where similar entities are clustered using
                  features extracted from entity’s biographical information, words from sentences
                  surrounding the entity in texts and entity’s social network and relationships.
                  Other techniques involve using gazetteers and name authority files as external
                  references to aid the disambiguation process. Smith and Crane (Smith and Crane,
                  2001), for example, use gazetteers to disambiguate geographic place names. 


               
SNAC’s focus is more precisely a clustering problem rather than a classification
                  problem, since we want to group, in an unsupervised way, EAC-CPF records belonging
                  to the same entity. While some of the work mentioned above uses sophisticated
                  techniques to discover entities in the text, the EAC-CPF standard provides direct
                  access to the name and other information about the entity. This, combined with the
                  availability of the name authority files, allows use of simpler algorithms based
                  on exact string match and authority file look up for matching entities. 

            
            
               
Implementation 


               
We have 158,079 EAC-CPF records — 114,639 persons, 41,177 corporate bodies and
                  2,263 family names — derived from Library of Congress, the Online Archive of
                  California, and Northwest Digital Archive EAD records. The records were parsed
                  with the EAC-CPF specification to extract information on an entity’s name, type,
                  and relations, stored in a relational database. Preferred and alternate names from
                  the VIAF name authority files were indexed using the Cheshire II information
                  retrieval engine (Larson et.al, 1996), which uses a probabilistic information
                  retrieval algorithm to find the top n VIAF records and their associated names
                  given an entity name. We mapped each EAC-CPF entity to names from top n VIAF
                  records (currently the top five VIAF records). These mappings are also represented
                  in a relational database. 


               
The primary approach is based on the simple hypothesis that two EAC-CPF records
                  belong to the same entity if the entity names exactly match. This simple technique
                  reduced the total number of unique records to 129,915. This meant that EAC-CPF
                  records with different names belonging to the same entity were not matched. This
                  was often due to the presence of existence dates in the name fields (e.g.,
                  “Einstein, Albert, 1879-1955” will not match “Einstein, Albert”). 


               
Our second technique uses the hypothesis that entities referring to the same name
                  authority record must be the same. Our database and index setup made this easy.
                  For a given pair of entities, we search the entity VIAF names mapping table for
                  alternate names for the first entity. If the second entity’s name appears in the
                  first entity’s list of possible alternate names, we consider the two entities to
                  be the same. Match results are parameterized by how liberal the search is:
                  including names from all the top five ranked VIAF records would result in a higher
                  number of matches but fewer accurate matches. Using names from higher ranked VIAF
                  records would give a lower number of matches with better accuracy. However,
                  evaluation of the technique showed that using the best matching or top ranked VIAF
                  record reduced the number of unique EAC-CPF records to 124,657, or 5248 records
                  less than what was achieved using the exact name match technique. This was
                  contrary to our expectations and further evaluation suggested that it was a result
                  of either subtle differences in the way the names are spelled and punctuated or
                  the use of names that are not present in the authority files. Using lower ranked
                  VIAF records reduced the number of unique records but introduced serious matching
                  errors and was not a viable option. 

            
            
               
Conclusions 


               
We have described our current implementations that match and merge EAC-CPF records
                  belonging to the same entity. Our implementations use exact name match as the
                  criteria or use the name authority files as an external reference to disambiguate
                  and find matches. Our current technique finds mostly accurate matches; false
                  matches occur only when there are two different entities with the same name or
                  when the name authority file has inaccurate information. Although it is possible
                  for different entities to have the same name, the use of existence dates can
                  differentiate the names and given that the VIAF record combines information from
                  institutions with rigorous standards, it is unlikely that the records will have
                  inaccurate information. 


               
However, our current approach still fails to identify many possible matches. The
                  main reasons seem to be subtle variations in names and punctuation or use of names
                  that are not present in the authority files. To handle spelling issues, we plan to
                  experiment on using string comparison algorithms (such as “edit distance”
                  algorithms) and use comparison results as features for a clustering algorithm. We
                  will also experiment with other information about the entities, such as their
                  biographies, relations with other entities, works produced, etc., and external
                  sources such as DBPedia. However, because entity description records are created
                  for individual archives, it is possible that this additional information is
                  non-redundant and therefore not useful for matching purposes. 

            
         
         
References:

            
               
                  
Bagga, A.
                     Baldwin, B.
                     1998
                      “Entity-based Cross-document
                        coreferencing using the vector space model, ” 
                     Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
                     Computational Linguistics, 
                     1
                     79-85
                  


                  
Bunescu, R.
                     Pasca, M.
                     2006
                      “Using encyclopedic knowledge for named
                        entity disambiguation, ” 
                     Proceedings of EACL, 
                     6
                  


                  
Larson, R. R.
                     McDonough, J.
                     O’Leary, P.
                     Kuntz, L.
                      Moon, R.
                     1996
                      “Cheshire II: Designing a next-generation
                        online catalog, ” 
                     Journal of the American Society for Information
                     Science, 
                     47
                     7
                     555-567
                  


                  

                     Mann, G. S.
                     Yarowsky, D.
                     2003
                      “Unsupervised personal name disambiguation, ” 
                     Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natural Language
                     Learning at HLT-NAACL 2003, 
                     4
                     33-40
                  


                  

                     Smith, D.
                     Crane, G.
                     2001
                      “Disambiguating geographic names in a
                        historical digital library, ” 
                     Research and Advanced Technology for Digital
                     Libraries, 
                     127-136
                  

               
            
         
      
Paper Three: The Social Networks and Archival Context Project: Developing a
                  Prototype Historical Resource and Access System

                  Brian Tingle, 
                  California Digital Library, 
                  
brian.tingle.cdlib.org@gmail.com

               
Introduction 


               
While authority file interfaces for library authority control is reasonably well
                  understood, archival authority records provide more detailed description and
                  possibly extensive entries to related persons, corporate bodies, and families, and
                  related resources. This paper will explore the opportunities and challenges faced
                  in designing and implementing a public interface to access the unique archival
                  authority record aggregations created by the SNAC project. 


               
The prototype access system 
         (
link
)
    strives
                  to enable humanities researchers to make use of archival context records that
                  describe individuals, families, and formally organized groups to find resources
                  and identify social and professional relations that are hard to discover using
                  existing research tools and techniques. Existing methods require searching and
                  exploring dispersed archival finding aids and using the descriptions found to
                  further search and explore dispersed finding aids. The SNAC access system does
                  this work for the researcher, bringing this information together in a searchable
                  database and exposing the discovered social graph as open linked data. 


               
The prototype was made available for public testing on December 17, 2010. From
                  December 17, 2010, through February 17, 2011, the site had 47,857 visits and
                  104,223 page views, with 91.37% of traffic coming from Google searches. An
                  iterative development model is being utilized, and user feedback on the prototype
                  will help us to identify and prioritize ongoing development activities. New
                  features are released into the prototype site on an ongoing basis, as they are
                  developed. Grant-funded interface development will cease in April 2012 with the
                  completion of the project. Source code for the access interface is also available
                  as open source software 
         (
link
)
   . 


               
A copy of the social graph derived from the research data was released as a
                  graphML file 
         (
link
)
   
                   on February 17, 2011, under the Open Data Commons Attribution License
                        
         (
link
)
   .
                  Analysis is ongoing to figure out the optimal way to represent the social graph in
                  a conventional RDF model (such as with the FOAF ontology). 

            
            
               
Technical Infrastructure 


               
The semantics and structure of the records based on the EAC-CPF schema has been
                  the starting point of the initial prototype. The prototype is being built as an
                  application of the eXtensible Text Framework (XTF) and will support search,
                  display, and navigation of EAC-CPF records 
         (
link
)
   . The Tinkerpop Graph Processing
                  Stack 
                     
         (
link
)
    is also being utilized by the project to load the relationships
                  recorded in the derived EAC records into a graph database and exposing it though a
                  REST API to the interactive graph visualizations in the prototype interface. The
                  Tinkerpop stack is compatible with linked data technologies through the RDF Sail
                  interface, and will be used as the platform to expose the project’s data as linked
                  data when the semantic modeling is complete. 

            
            
               
Current and Future Development 


               
The access system being developed resembles library systems based on authority
                  control, but the EAC-CPF archival authority records are far more complex than
                  those created by the library community. In addition to entry control (authorized
                  and alternative names), the archival authority records frequently have
                  biographical-historical data, occupation, dates of existence, languages used, as
                  well links to related people and resources. An additional challenge is presented
                  by relative quantities of descriptive data found in each record. Some records have
                  as many as 50 or more alternative names, scores of subject headings, more than 50
                  related persons, families, or corporate bodies, and many linked archival finding
                  aids or titles. Other descriptions are quite brief, based on the name occurring in
                  one finding aid and failing to match an authority record. Finding the right method
                  for displaying and facilitating navigation of this data presents many challenges. 


               
The initial prototype focuses on searching, browsing and displaying the EAC-CPF
                  records as formatted web pages for researchers. Both full text (description less
                  control data) and specific component searches are supported. Full text searches
                  are weighted to give preference to matches in the <identity> section of the
                  record, where all forms of the name of the entity discovered in the derivation,
                  matching, and merging processes are listed. Limiting a search to the
                  <identity> section restricts the retrieval to just the forms of name found
                  in the section, and thus excludes matches in other parts of the description, such
                  as in entries for related named entities. As users enter searches, authorized
                  forms of names are suggested. Users can browse the top occupations and subjects in
                  addition to an alphabetical index of all names in the database. The alphabetical
                  index feature is likely to become less useful as the number of records increases.
                  (At this date, there are over 123,920 named entities.) Search results can be
                  narrowed down to names that have a particular occupation or subject term
                  associated, or restricted to entity type, such as person, corporate body, or
                  family. 


               
In the initial prototype, a wide variety of data and links are displayed to the
                  user. For each EAC-CPF record, the following descriptive components are displayed:
                  authoritative name, alternative names, dates of existence, sex, affiliated
                  countries, occupations, subject terms used in describing related archival records
                  (for record creators), and biographical/historical description (either as prose or
                  a chronological list). In addition to the above biographical/historical data, the
                  following linked information will also be displayed: related persons, corporate
                  bodies, and families; descriptions of related archival records (that is, finding
                  aids within which the name was discovered), published work by or about the
                  described entity. Links are also provided to a matching Virtual International
                  Authority File (VIAF) record, when one is identified as matching. 


               
Though the outbound links to finding aids and VIAF records are currently
                  implemented, the internal "links," for now, are implemented as searches. 


               
While the derivation, matching, and merging processing continues, the persistence
                  of any given EAC-CPF record cannot be ensured: a record may be merged into another
                  record in subsequent processing, so it is difficult to assign persistent
                  identifiers or addresses in links to related entities. Once the deriving,
                  matching, and merging is complete (late in the project), links to associated
                  persons, corporate bodies, and families will directly retrieve the related
                  records. 


               
The list of titles for resources by and about the described entity that have been
                  gathered in the record is currently inactive. We anticipate eventually using
                  entries in this list to query WorldCat. When the project is complete, additional
                  links will be made to descriptions of named entities in DBpedia and WorldCat
                  Identities, where matching entries are found. Also under consideration is offering
                  users the opportunity to use authoritative and alternative name entries to search
                  a selection of archive, library, and museum access systems, and public resources
                  such as Google, Bing, and Flickr. 


               
Another objective of SNAC is to employ a display and navigation tool to
                  graphically display and facilitate the navigation of the social and professional
                  networks discovered and documented in the EAC-CPF records and their relations to
                  one another. Visualization of abstract networks is a well-studied problem and
                  there are many tools available that support the graphML file format that the
                  project has used to represent the historical social graph released under an open
                  license. The project’s objective is to develop a visualization and navigation
                  interface that will make it possible for humanities researchers to explore and
                  discover social-professional relations and related resources that would be
                  difficult to explore and discover using simple lists. Experimentation with
                  appropriate graph visualization and navigation interfaces is ongoing at the time
                  of this writing, and a primitive version of this feature was released in February
                  2010. 


               
In the public interface to the prototype resource and access system, we are
                  concerned not only with people interacting with the system; but also their
                  computational agents. The semantic web and open data movements are developing new
                  ways of linking and expressing the relations between data used by researchers. The
                  project intends to make the EAC-CPF records available as Linked Data. At a
                  minimum, the XML files will be made available, but the project will also explore
                  using RDF and perhaps other mappings of all or some of the data. 


               
At the time of the conference the prototype resource will still be under active
                  development. The paper will describe and demonstrate the latest version of the
                  prototype available at the time of the conference, and solicit feedback from the
                  participants that will be helpful in setting the final development agenda for the
                  final year of the project. 

            
         

      