Poster: Bamboo Technology Project: Building Cyberinfrastructure for the Arts and
          Humanities

          Cole, Timothy, 
          University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 
          
t-cole3@illinois.edu

        

          Fraistat, Neil, 
          Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH), 
          
fraistat@umd.edu

        

          Greenbaum, David, 
          University of California at Berkeley, 
          
dag@berkeley.edu

        

          Lester, Dave, 
          Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH), 
          
dlester@umd.edu

        

          Millon, Emma, 
          Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH), 
          
emillon@umd.edu

        
Introduction

        
This poster will provide an overview of the Bamboo Technology Project and demonstrate
          some of its prototypes. We are currently midway through an 18-month implementation phase
          that builds on the Bamboo Planning Project – a process that engaged approximately 600
          faculty, librarians, and technologists from 115 institutions between Spring 2008 and
          Autumn 2010 – both of which have been funded by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.

        
The Bamboo Technology Project (BTP) is a multi-institutional, interdisciplinary effort
          that brings together humanities scholars, librarians, and information technologists to
          tackle the question: “How can we advance arts and humanities research
            through the development of shared technology services?” Comprised of an
          international partnership of 10 universities,The partner institutions are
            Australian National University; Indiana University; Northwestern University; Tufts
            University; University of California, Berkeley; University of Chicago; University of
            Illinois, Urbana-Champaign; University of Maryland; University of Oxford; and University
            of Wisconsin, Madison the project is devoted to building applications and shared
          infrastructure for humanities research.

      
      
        
Structured Work Areas

        
During the Bamboo Planning Project, we found that scholar participants repeatedly
          expressed their desire for technology that would allow them to annotate, to collaborate,
          to gather materials, to organize information, to share materials, to store and preserve
          materials, and to use social media. Building upon workshop discussions, we identified a
          more general set of categories to describe central scholarly practices in the humanities
          that could benefit from technology. Prominent among them were the practices of
          aggregation, annotation, consideration, engagement, and interaction.Theme
            Groups may be found 
here
 Using these categories as guidelines, and drawing on the project’s
          leadership and participation from different partner institutions, we organized ourselves
          into four major interconnected areas:

      
      
        
Structured Work Areas

        

          
            

              
Research Environments
 “Adapters” are being built
              that will enable scholars working within the Project Bamboo Research Environments to
              access and apply research tools to dispersed content collections such as materials in
              the HathiTrust and Perseus collections. Research is being conducted to enable
              OpenSocial gadgets to be leveraged within the Project Bamboo Research Environments and
              potentially other areas of the Bamboo ecosystem. OpenSocial is a promising approach to
              enable us to develop functionality once and apply it many times. We are also building
              a Tools and Services Registry through which scholars can discover other software tools
              that their fellow humanist scholars are using.

            

              
Corpora Space
 We will carry out a community design
              process to plan for a future generation of corpora-centered virtual research
              environments to support the central and growing importance of data and of corpora
              curation for humanities’ scholarship. The results of this design process will be
              implemented during the second 18-month phase of the project.

            

              
Scholarly Web Services on a Services Platform
 We
              will model existent digital humanities applications as web services and then deploy
              these or their proxies, and other web services, on robust platforms to help support
              many application developers in the humanities.

            

              
Collections Interoperability
 We are selecting and
              recommending metadata standards for digital content that will allow for predictable
              use of important scholarly material across all Project Bamboo Work Spaces and with all
              Bamboo tools. We are building an initial suite of adapters and connectors that
              facilitate easy, cross-collection use of these “target” collections within the Bamboo
              environment: content from the inter-university HathiTrust repository; selected content
              from the Perseus Digital LIbrary; and 400-years of English texts from the Text
              Creation Partnership (TCP). The CI group is collaborating with other Bamboo working
              groups and external experts to identify the most appropriate standards to implement
              for both content access and structural interoperability.

          
        
      
      
        
Interoperability and Shared Infrastructure for the Humanities
          

        
The BTP is establishing shared infrastructure, in the form of web services, interoperable
          collections, and organizational partnerships to meet the technology needs of humanities
          researchers and institutions.

      
      
        

          
            

              
RESTful APIs
 Project Bamboo is modeling services
              as resources, and will leverage RESTful APIs to manage these resources across the
              Bamboo ecosystem.

            

              
AuthN-AuthZ protocols
 Project Bamboo will delegate
              authentication to established institutional infrastructure, such as Shibboleth, and to
              social media identity providers. Ongoing work with Internet2 committees such as
              Shib-dev and COmanage will leverage edu- space experience and adopt new and existing
              software to meet Bamboo's requirements.

          
        
      
      
        
Future Work

        
Our next eighteen-month phase will primarily be concerned with implementing the Corpora
          Space Road Map, which will focus in terms of content on the 450 years of print culture in
          English from 1473 until 1923, along with the texts from the Classical world upon which
          that print culture is based. As an initial set of collections, we will be focusing on
          Perseus, 
TCP
, ECCO,
          EEBO, HathiTrust, Google Books, Oxford Text Archive, and 
AUSTLit
. Although we will
          begin with these corpora, we envisage a principle of user-driven growth. In gathering this
          material, we will move from the earlier to the later, because earlier texts pose more
          difficult textual and linguistic issues. In designing protocols that will address these
          issues of early texts, we believe we will anticipate most of the difficulties of the later
          material.

        
To enable users to work with these corpora, we will provide tools from the following five
          classes: 1. Curation; 2. Corpus Search and Discovery; 3. Collation; 4. Annotation; 5.
          Analysis/Visualization. We aim to build a modular environment that will attract content
          and collections from providers beyond the Bamboo partnership, and that will encourage the
          broad-based development of tools to operate on the data.

      
    