Poster: NeDiMAH a Network for Digital Arts and Humanities

                    Hughes, Lorna, 
                    National Library of Wales, 
                    
lorna.hughes@llgc.org.uk

                

                    Jannadis, Fotis, 
                    Institute for German Philology, University of
                        Würzburg, 
                    
fotis.jannidis@uni-wuerzburg.de

                

                    Schreibman, Susan, 
                    Digital Humanities Observatory, Royal Irish Academy, 
                    
s.schreibman@ria.ie

                
Introduction

                
The European Science Foundation has recently recommended the NeDiMAH Network for
                    funding through its 2009 Research Network Programme. The Network will run from
                    June 2011-June 2015, and will provide a focus for researchers using digital
                    research methods in the arts and humanities. NeDiMAH will provide a
                    “methodological layer” to enhance and add value to infrastructure initiatives,
                    and to digital collections. Outputs of the Network will provide evidence of the
                    value of ICT methods for arts and humanities research. This poster will describe
                    the Network and encourage wide participation amongst DH2011 attendees in Europe,
                    and explore pan-national collaboration. 

            
            
                
Aims of the Network

                
The NeDiMAH Network will examine the practice of, and evidence for, advanced ICT
                    methods in the arts and humanities across Europe, and articulate these findings
                    in a series of outputs and publications. NeDiMAH will provide a locus of
                    networking and interdisciplinary exchange of expertise among the trans-European
                    community of digital arts and humanities researchers, as well as those engaged
                    with creating and curating scholarly and cultural heritage digital collections.
                    NeDiMAH will work closely with the EC funded e-research infrastructure projects
                    DARIAH (Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities, 
         (
link
)
    ) and CLARIN (Common Language Resources and
                    Technology Infrastructures, 
         (
link
)
   ), as well as
                    other national and international initiatives. The Network will bring together
                    practitioners to examine the use of formal computationally-based methods for the
                    capture, investigation, analysis, study, modelling, presentation, dissemination,
                    publication and evaluation of arts and humanities materials for research. This
                    research will contribute to the classification and expression of ICT methods
                    used in the arts and humanities in three key outputs: a map visualising the ICT
                    methodological commons; an enhanced ICT Methods Ontology; and a collaborative
                    forum for the European community of practitioners active in this area. These
                    outputs will serve to formalize and codify the expression of work in the digital
                    arts and humanities, give greater academic credibility to this work, and enable
                    peer-reviewed scholarship in this area. NediMAH will maximise the value of
                    national and international e-research infrastucture initiatives by developing a
                    methodological layer that allows arts and humanities researchers to develop,
                    refine and share research methods that allow them to create and make best use
                    digital methods and collections. Better contextualization of ICT Methods will
                    also build human capacity, and be of particular benefit for early stage
                    researchers. 

            
            
                
Background

                
Advanced ICT methods for discovering, annotating, comparing, referring, sampling,
                    illustrating, and representing digital content (Unsworth, 2000) can be found at
                    a key point of intersection between disciplines, collections and researchers:
                    data-rich disciplines (e.g. archeology, library and information science, and
                    musicology) have refined new ICT methods, and within the data-driven sciences
                    research methods have emerged around data and information processes. The use of
                    advanced ICT methods can effect significant benefits in arts and humanities
                    scholarship. Humanities research can also benefit from the significant volume of
                    digital material available to arts and humanities researchers, the access and
                    use of which is now being supported by the development of research
                    infrastructures. 

                
 Despite this activity, uptake and impact of ICT based methods remains
                    fragmented. A recent DARIAH investigation into research practice and Research
                    Actors, examining the institutional settings of digital scholarship in the arts
                    and humanities, has shown that the use of ICT research methods is often
                    concentrated in specific academic disciplines, or in libraries or archives, and
                    there are few opportunities for transfer of knowledge across disciplinary
                    boundaries. This creates disciplinary "silos", and communities of practice tend
                    to develop around disciplines, rather than research methods (e.g., archeological
                    computing, etc). Reasons for limited uptake and multidisciplinary collaboration
                    were expressed in the ACO*HUM report (
         (
link
)
   ), and in the recent evaluation of
                    the UK's AHRC ICT Methods Network (
         (
link
)
   ). These indicated that
                    there is an urgent requirement for an international collaborative effort to
                    undertake a formal analysis and expression of the ICT methods that can be used
                    for arts and humanities research. Computational methods demand the utmost rigour
                    and precision in their application, and accordingly, research practitioners
                    working in the emerging field of the digital humanities have begun to formalize
                    new theories of the interaction between content, analytical and interpretative
                    tools and technologies, methodological approaches, and disciplinary kinships. 

                
NediMAH will be an interdisciplinary, international Network of expert
                    practitioners in the digital arts and humanities with the following objectives: 

                
                    
                    
To investigate and articulate the use of formal computationally-based
                        methods for the capture, investigation, analysis, study, modelling,
                        presentation, dissemination, publication and evaluation of arts and
                        humanities materials for research.

                    
                    
To facilitate collaboration in this research by: 
                            
Building a community of practice that is inclusive in terms of
                                disciplinary coverage and national representation, as well as
                                seeking the active participation of scholars at all stages of the
                                career cycle

                            
Developing a framework for common exchange of expertise and
                                knowledge

                            
Linking researchers with their peers across the disciplines

                            
Enabling participants to develop, share and refine ICT methods as
                                the core elements of digital scholarship and articulate these
                                methods formally

                        
                    
                    
To map the outputs and findings of these investigations in two digital
                        resources:

                    

                    
                    
A "methodological commons" to express disciplinary commons, partnerships
                        and synergies, and the potential for cross and interdisciplinary
                        partnerships.


                    
                    
The ICT Methods Taxonomy: 
                            
To build a community knowledge base by extending the
                                arts-humanities.net and DRAPIER resources across Europe. This
                                resource will be embedded into DARIAH beyond the end of the funding
                                period to ensure sustainability and continued dissemination of
                                Network outputs.

                            
To investigate issues related to the scholarly publishing of ICT
                                methods in the arts and humanities

                            
To publish Network research in a series of books and
                                articles.

                        
                    
                
            
            
                
Network Activities


                
NeDiMAH has a collaborative structure that is trans-European, interdisciplinary,
                    and able to leverage existing nationally funded research and research support
                    activities that can collectively support the development of a better
                    understanding of the role of advanced ICT methods in arts and humanities
                    research. This will support a series of core activities and a mechanism for
                    exchange of expertise and material. These activities include a series of
                    Methodological Working Groups, convened to consider specific methodological
                    areas over the entire duration of the Network. They will investigate the topic
                    from three areas of scientific focus:

                
                    
Investigating the use of the method and gathering information about
                        specific projects that use it

                    
Analysis of current practice

                    
 Modelling ways in which the method can be applied across the disciplines
                        in scholarly practice 

                
                
Each Working Group will convene a Workshop each year, a key activity by which
                    advanced methods will be formalized.


                
Proposed Working Group topics include:

                
                    
Spatial and Temporal Modelling 
ICT methods include agent-based
                            modelling geo-temporal referencing and predictive spatial modeling.

                    

                    
Information Visualization 
Visualisation refers to techniques used to
                            summarise and present data visually, in a form that enables people to
                            understand and analyse the information. Formats can include images (3-D
                            or 2-D), maps, timelines, graphs and tables.

                    
Ontological methods 
Ontological mapping is used to semantically
                            interrelate information from diverse sources to represent complex
                            relationships. In order to do that, it relies on ontologies, formal
                            representations of a set of concepts and relations.

                    
Information extraction and data mining 
Text and data mining can reveal
                            new knowledge from (usually) larger amounts of textual data extracting
                            hidden patterns, analysing the results and summarising them into a
                            useful format.

                    
Linguistic Corpora for interdisciplinary research 
To study language as
                            expressed in such corpora, corpus linguistics makes use of methods such
                            as annotation, content analysis and parsing. Originally done by hand,
                            corpora are now largely derived by an automated process.

                    
Methods and tools for working with digital manuscripts and images
                            
Methods include text encoding to image restoration, and tools for
                            digital editions

                
            
            
                
Participation in the Network


                
NeDiMAH will invite the broadest participation from European researchers in the
                    digital arts and humanities through an open call. The Network also has a Global
                    Dimension, which would enable the participation of researchers outside the EU.
                    NeDiMAH has the full support of the following international digital humanities
                    organizations: the Allied Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO), the
                    Association of Literary and Linguistic Computing (ALLC); and the Association of
                    Computing in the Humanities (ACH) and CentreNet. Digital Humanities 2011 will be
                    an important opportunity for the Network to invite collaboration. 

            
        