Poster: Constructing DARIAH—the e-Infrastructure for the Arts and
                    Humanities

                    Blanke, Tobias, 
                    King's College London, 
                    
tobias.blanke@kcl.ac.uk

                

                    Fritze, Christiane, 
                    
fritze@sub.uni-goettingen.de

                    State and University Library Goettingen, 
                

                    Romary, Laurent, 
                    
laurent.romary@inria.fr

                    INRIA, 
                

                
The poster will elicit our vision for the DARIAH infrastructure and the first
                    steps towards its implementation. DARIAH (Digital Research Infrastructure for
                    the Arts and Humanities; http://www.dariah.eu) is a European project funded
                    under the ESFRI programme (http://cordis.europa.eu/esfri/), which aims to design
                    a virtual bridge between various humanities and arts resources across Europe.
                    DARIAH is currently in its transition from the preparatory phase to the
                    construction phase, which will be completed by the establishment of the legal
                    framework DARIAH ERIC by end of 2011. 

                
Just like astronomers now require a virtual observatory to study the stars and
                    other distant objects in the galaxy on the basis of a wide variety of existing
                    observations, researchers in the arts and humanities need a digital
                    infrastructure to bring together and collaboratively work with dispersed
                    scholarly resources (e.g. digital content, services, methodologies). DARIAH will
                    be such an infrastructure with a European dimension to support research
                    practitioners at all levels, from beginners through to those employing advanced
                    techniques and methodologies. The grand vision for DARIAH is to facilitate
                    long-term access to, and re-use of, all European arts and humanities digital
                    research data and primary sources. 

                
A typical use case is elicited below (the poster will present several of such
                    scenarios taken from actual e-humanists Europe-wide) 

            
            
                
The Digital Postgraduate

                
Daniela is a postgraduate researcher (PhD candidate) in material culture at a
                    Greek university. She holds a first degree in classical archaeology and a
                    Master's in anthropology. Daniela uses ICT tools very efficiently and considers
                    them vital for her research. She is currently researching material culture and
                    its relationship to the perception of space and landscape in an area of northern
                    Greece. Her topic lies within the areas of archaeology and cultural
                    anthropology; therefore, Daniela's sources include artefacts, interviews with
                    local people, and extensive visual material. As her work is largely
                    interdisciplinary in nature, there is a propensity for making fortuitous
                    discoveries while looking for something unrelated; serendipity is very important
                    in her work. This approach means that she needs to login to different services
                    simultaneously—even login multiple times a day if disconnected—and
                    she must keep multiple open windows in her browser. Furthermore, she must be
                    able to evaluate the authenticity and value of any item she discovers. Thanks to
                    the technical environment developed in the VCCe-Infrastructure of DARIAH,
                    Daniela benefits from both a single sign-on environment for accessing all the
                    necessary digital assets,as well as a virtual portfolio where she can gather all
                    selected sources. The metadata and provenance data associated with an item
                    allows her to evaluate the authenticity and value of an asset, and to link to
                    related items (e.g. other sources for the same asset, other formats, research
                    addressing that asset) once she has found something of interest. From this
                    portfolio, she can publish geographical views on her data, which she exchanges
                    and discusses with other colleagues in Europe. 

            
            
                
The mission of DARIAH is to enhance and support digitally-enabled research across
                    the humanities and arts. DARIAH aims to develop and maintain an infrastructure
                    in support of ICT-based research practices and is working with communities of
                    practice to: 

                
                    
Explore and apply ICT-based methods and tools to enable new research
                        questions to be asked and old questions to be posed in new ways;

                    
Improve research opportunities and outcomes through linking distributed
                        digital source materials of many kinds

                    
Exchange knowledge, expertise, methodologies and practices across domains
                        and disciplines.

                
                
DARIAH is also not singly discipline-focused; instead DARIAH seeks to support all
                    disciplines across the humanities, encouraging interdisciplinarity and the
                    exploration and sharing of content, tools and methods. Research practice in the
                    arts and humanities is about criticism and meaning, interpretation and
                    re-interpretation, and about extracting meaning from often incomplete and fuzzy
                    data. It requires researchers to seek out a wide range of primary and secondary
                    sources, to organise and structure these, to analyse and interpret them, and to
                    publish the results. In this era of pervasive broadband connectivity, the way in
                    which these processes are undertaken is changing, and in some cases, the
                    processes themselves are changing. Increasingly, research practitioners are
                    using the power of the internet, new tools, and the range of digital information
                    that is available to them to create their own personal network spaces, to
                    digitally publish highly interactive, multimedia-themed collections (critical
                    editions) of research information and knowledge, and to visualise and
                    reconceptualise their interpretations and analysis. New forms of collaboration
                    are also emerging as the tools available encourage and enable
                    ‘web-working’ across the globe. 

                
Hence the key strategic aim of DARIAH is to support researchers in the creation
                    and use of research data and tools, and to apply and use ICT-enabled methods to
                    analyse and interpret digital source materials. 

                
DARIAH will be an infrastructure to promote, support, and advance research in the
                    digital humanities. Digital humanities is a long-established research field,
                    with its origins in the Forties of the last century. Over the past 60 years it
                    has progressed and a large variety of digital humanities centres and related
                    organizations have developed. However, we do not perceive the digital humanities
                    to be a closed field of existing centres but rather an open and developing
                    research environment. Everybody interested in using digital means for arts and
                    humanities research is part of the DARIAH community of practice. In this view,
                    the DARIAH infrastructure would be a connected network of people, information,
                    tools and methodologies for investigating, exploring and supporting work across
                    the broad spectrum of the digital humanities. 

                
The DARIAH network will be designed to be as a decentralised network of
                    competency centres (VCC – Virtual Competency Centres), which will allow
                    services to stay close to end-users (researchers) either geographically or
                    thematically. Common technologies (e.g. for authentication or federation of
                    archive contents) and good practices (standardised formats, digital assets
                    management workflows) will ensure coherence across the support services offered
                    by the competency centres. 

                
When DARIAH is operational after the construction phase, technical products by
                    DARIAH will be manifold: 

                
                    
technological services and tutorials that help existing humanities data
                        archives to link their systems into the DARIAH network;

                    
a package of software and consultancy/training, which supports emerging
                        data centres in establishing their own technology environment quickly; 

                    
an interoperability layer that will connect data centres; 

                    
means of linking into DARIAH for those countries/disciplines that do not
                        yet have e-humanities infrastructure and cannot afford it in the near
                        future; 

                    
best practices and guidelines for individual researchers that foster data
                        interoperability and preservation across the DARIAH network; 

                    
a network of expertise linking each scholar to an active and vibrant
                        community of international digital humanists. 

                
                
DARIAH will make an important contribution towards e-humanities, providing
                    additional services to analyse, annotate and share arts and humanities research
                    activities. DARIAH will stimulate and provide expertise on all aspects of
                    e-humanities, from best practices for digitisation to metadata standards and
                    advice on analysis methods and systems.

            
        
References: