Poster: Mashing up the Map: Film Geography and Digital Cartography in a Cultural
                    Atlas of Australia

                    Stadler, Jane, 
                    University of Queensland, 
                    
j.stadler@uq.edu.au

                
This poster presents research from the online movie map component of a new
                    digital resource: A Cultural Atlas of Australia is a collaborative,
                    interdisciplinary digital humanities research project that uses interactive
                    cartography and spatial theory to map Australian narrative fiction across three
                    media forms. Building on the growing interest in digital cartography and spatial
                    theory in the humanities, this initiative investigates the cultural and
                    historical significance of location and landscape by presenting a national
                    survey of narrative space spanning Australian novels, films and plays. The
                    broader project involves Dr Peta Mitchell from literary geography and Dr Stephen
                    Carleton from theatre studies in an investigation of the mediation, remediation
                    and geovisualisation of locations and landscapes in cinematic, literary, and
                    theatrical narratives.

                
There has been a recent surge of popular and critical interest in linking online
                    mapping with cinema. This manifests most obviously in a rash of “movie maps” and
                    online spatial resources such as Robert Allen’s Going to the Show, which
                    digitally maps a history of moviegoing in North Carolina (
         (
link
)
   )Allen, Robert C. “Getting to
                        Going to the Show,” New Review of Film and Television Studies 8, no. 3
                        (2010): 264–276. ; the National Film and Sound Archive’s
                    film-location map on the Australian Screen Online site (
         (
link
)
   ); and Sébastien Caquard’s work on cinematic
                    cartography in the Canadian Cinematographic Territories Atlas (
         (
link
)
   ), which traces the history of animated
                    maps and virtual globes such as Google Earth through cinema, examines the
                    technological interface connecting cinema and cartography, and maps the
                    locations of cinemas across CanadaSee Sébastien Caquard, “Foreshadowing
                        Contemporary Digital Cartography: A Historical Review of Cinematic Maps in
                        Films,” The Cartographic Journal 46, no. 1 (2009): 46–55.. While many
                    such projects focus on mapping film production and distribution locations, I
                    seek to focus attention on developments in movie mapping from since 1980s and
                    situate such work in relation to cinematic cartography and the complex interplay
                    of narrative settings and shooting locations in Australian cinema.

                
Over the past decade, interactive online mapping—what D. R. Fraser Taylor has
                    called “cybercartography”D. R. Fraser Taylor, Cybercartography: Theory and
                        Practice (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2006)—has become a particularly
                    salient issue within cartography, geography, and humanities research.See,
                        for instance, William Cartwright, Michael P. Peterson, and Georg Gartner,
                        eds, Multimedia Cartography (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1999); Mark Monmonier,
                        “Cartography: The Multidisciplinary Pluralism of Cartographic Art,
                        Geospatial Technology, and Empirical Scholarship,” Progress in Human
                        Geography 31, no. 3 (2007): 371–79; and Jeremy W. Crampton, “Maps 2.0: Map
                        Mashups and the New Spatial Media," in Mapping: A Critical Introduction to
                        Cartography and GIS (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2010), 25–38.  Since
                    Google released its Google Maps API in 2005, the Google Maps code has been
                    freely accessible as long as the resulting map “mashup” remains nonproprietary
                    and in the public domain. According to William Buckingham and Samuel Dennis, the
                    development of open source mapping tools, such as Google Maps, has generated
                    much interest in the use of maps for “understanding ‘non-mapped’ phenomena
                    (e.g., qualitative data or localized community information and
                        knowledge).”William R. Buckingham and Samuel F. Dennis, Jr.,
                        “Cartographies of Participation: How the Changing Nature of Cartography has
                        Opened Community and Cartographer Collaboration,” Cartographic Perspectives
                        64 (2009): 55.

                
Recent technological developments in digital cartography make it possible to
                    visualise and to map the ways in which spatial storytelling produces and
                    translates space across different media. This poster presents
                    geovisualisation—in the form of an interactive online map—as a means by which to
                    map representations of iconic landscapes and sites within Australian cinema. The
                    Cultural Atlas of Australia uses an interdisciplinary method incorporating
                    cultural geography and textual analysis to interpret, situate, and contextualise
                    the representation of location. The project remediates that information in the
                    form of an online, interactive map that has the potential to suggest new ways of
                    thinking about location and landscape and break down traditional typologies of
                    Australian space. This digital humanities research advances on traditional
                    cartographic explorations and representations of space, making it possible to
                    visualise new perspectives on, intersections between, and layerings of
                    geographic and textual information. This aims to enable the identification of
                    regional tropes, patterns and gaps in spatial representations that may not have
                    previously been evident in research that focused on isolated case studies of
                    individual texts, whether literary, cinematic or theatrical.

                
As a research tool, the finished map will be searchable (by medium, location,
                    theme, author, and text) and will enable users to generate and export their own
                    maps with information they require. These functions have the capacity to reveal
                    how cultural meanings accrue on the landscape, and how our relationship with,
                    and understanding of, the natural and cultural environment changes over time.
                    The possibilities for incorporating participants’ photographs, videos, and
                    textual accounts of Australian places via mobile social computing technologies
                    opens up still more opportunities for the representation of multiple
                    perspectives.

                
Geovisualisation has the potential to pose new questions for spatial analysis and
                    to encourage broader public engagement in cultural geography. However, as a form
                    of remediation, it does carry its own representational problems. As Barbara
                    Piatti et al have noted, the geography of fiction is an imprecise
                        one.Barbara Piatti, et al., “Mapping Literature: Towards a Geography
                        of Fiction,” in Cartography and Art, ed. William Cartwright, Georg Gartner,
                        and Antje Lehn (Berlin: Springer, 2009): 182.  Piatti is speaking
                    about mapping literary fiction, but the point can be made for all forms of
                    narrative fiction. The representation of space and place can never simply be
                    mimetic, but always, to a greater or lesser degree, creates an imaginative
                    geography that may correspond to what Piatti calls the “geospace” (or map
                        space)Ibid. directly, obiquely, or not at all. Bringing film
                    space into the analytical frame carries its own set of complexities and
                    ambiguities because film requires attention to the relationship between
                    narrative locations and shooting locations. Beyond the question of
                    impreciseness, the process of re-presenting narrative locations is a process of
                    imagining and re-imagining geography that, by its very nature, is also
                    political.

                
This project demonstrates that films are more than representations, more than
                    containers for narrative symbolism and ideological views and values, and this
                    extends to any geovisualisation strategy that seeks to map those texts. Such
                    texts are also generative—productive of meanings, social relationships and
                    subject positions. Tom Conley argues in Cartographic
                        Cinema that cinematic images “produce space through the act of
                        perception”;Tom Conley, Cartographic Cinema (Minneapolis: University
                        of Minnesota Press, 2007), 20. similarly, film stages and
                    imaginatively invokes space in ways that subsequently inflect the meanings
                    readers associate with actual places. Where film geography and cinematic
                    cartography enable analysis of locational information in narrative fiction
                    informed by insights from geography as well as cinema and cultural studies, it
                    also builds from the premise that such texts intervene in the cultural field and
                    alter the perceptual, ideological, political and practical orientation of
                    readers and audiences in relation to the physical environment.

            
        