Poster: Building a Tool for the Analysis of Translations: The Case of Epistemic
                    Modality in Edgar Allan Poe’s Stories 

                    Zupan, Simon, 
                    University of Maribor, Slovenia, 
                    
simon.zupan@uni-mb.si

                

                    Juuso, Ilkka, 
                    University of Oulu, Finland, 
                    
ilkka.juuso@ee.oulu.fi

                

                    Opas-Hänninen, Lisa Lena, 
                    University of Oulu, Finland, 
                    
lisa.lena.opas-hanninen@oulu.fi

                
This paper investigates epistemic modality in Edgar Allan Poe’s Gothic stories
                    and their translations into Slovenian and Finnish. To facilitate this we have
                    built a tool that allows the researcher to align the translations, search for
                    the instances of epistemic stance and compare the original text with the
                    translations. From the point of view of translation studies, epistemic modality
                    is interesting in the context of Gothic stories, because it helps to create the
                    mood of the story and any major shifts in the translation may cause a loss of
                    the essence of the Gothic. On the other hand, the tool we have built is
                    applicable to any investigation into a text and its translations and will, we
                    hope, significantly aid those working in the field.

                
Epistemic modality has traditionally been regarded as the “manner in which the
                    meaning of a clause is qualified so as to reflect the speaker’s judgement of the
                    likelihood of the proposition it expresses being true” (Quirk et. al. 1992:
                    219). In other words, it shows the position that speakers adopt with respect to
                    the truth value of what they are saying (hence it is also referred to as
                    epistemic stance). As Halliday (Halliday and Matthiesen 2004) has pointed out,
                    speakers can adopt two extreme positions; they either qualify their proposition
                    as true (e.g. “Translation scholars are in need of efficient electronic
                    text-analysis tools.”) or, alternatively, as not true (“Translation scholars are
                    not in need of efficient electronic text-analysis tools.”). These two positions
                    are referred to as positive and negative polarity, respectively. More
                    importantly, speakers can also adopt various positions in between the two poles.
                    They can thus claim something to be “more” true (“Translation scholars are
                    definitely in need of efficient text-analysis tools.”) or “less” true
                    (“Translation scholars are probably not in need of efficient text-analysis
                    tools.”). It is precisely these intermediate positions that are strictly
                    referred to as epistemic modality because they indicate the speaker’s (apparent)
                    inability to ascertain the truth of the proposition they are making and
                    consequently qualify it as polar.

                
This has important implications for the Gothic stories, in particular from the
                    point of view of their translation into other languages. As Simpson (2004) has
                    pointed out, authors of Gothic stories often employ epistemic modality to add
                    uncertainty to them. These narratives thus abound in expressions such as
                    “possibly”, “perhaps”, “undoubtedly”, “it might have been”, “I believe” and the
                    like, which all indicate the protagonists’ (apparent) inability to be able to
                    tell what was behind a particular event or experience. In turn, this makes that
                    same event or experience appear mysterious. It also lays ground for evoking in
                    the reader the prototypical Gothic effects such as that of discomfort,
                    uncanniness or eeriness. Consequently, these linguistic features of the original
                    text need to be preserved in the translation. As our preliminary research has
                    shown, however, this is not always the case. Comparison of one of the Slovenian
                    translations with the original has shown that the translator failed to preserve
                    epistemic modality in some of the examples by turning them into polar sentences.
                    As a result, those passages in the target text lost some of their potential to
                    evoke the same Gothic effects as their corresponding passages in the
                    original.

                
In order to further investigate the extent of this phenomenon, we analyse several
                    of Edgar Allan Poe’s stories. These include The Fall of the
                        House of Usher, Berenice, The Masque of the Red Death, Metzengerstein,
                    and Ligeia, all of which can be seen as Gothic stories or
                    stories with Gothic elements.

                
To facilitate the comparison of the source text and the target text(s), we have
                    built ParallelTexts, a tool that allows the researcher to view two or three
                    texts simultaneously in a synchronized manner. It makes use of XML markup, using
                    pages and paragraphs, or other user-defined elements, for the purposes of
                    synchronization of texts. There is support for marking up additions, deletions
                    and other shifts in the text. The user interface shows a table-like view of the
                    texts and allows for simultaneous scrolling of the texts. Figure 1 below shows
                    the basic principle of the use interface, where the text in red on the left-hand
                    side is highlighted to indicate that it is not found in the text on the
                    right-hand side, ie the comparison version or the target text. Equally, the text
                    in green on the right-hand side indicates that this text has been added into the
                    target text and has no equivalent in the original text.

                

                    
Fig. 1 A first version of ParallelTexts, with some basic instructions for
                        using it

                    
Full Size Image 

                
                
With appropriate input data, ParallelTexts allows us to examine various aspects
                    of both the original text and its translation(s). First, it helps us identify
                    most instances of epistemic modality in the original text and allows easy access
                    to their corresponding sentences in the translation(s). Second, the tool allows
                    us to statistically examine the texts and determine various quantitative
                    features, among them the number of occurrences of epistemic modality and their
                    distribution in both the original and the translation. Finally, the quantitative
                    data collected with ParallelTexts will also allow us to qualitatively examine
                    individual instances of epistemic modality in both texts and determine the
                    cumulative effect of epistemic modality translation shifts on the translation as
                    a whole. We also expect that the tool will prove to be useful for other similar
                    translation studies text analyses. We believe that with some modification and
                    appropriate input data, ParallelTexts could be used to compare any type of
                    linguistic features in the original text and its translation. We wish to
                    demonstrate the tool at DH2011 and all feedback and suggestions for further
                    improvement of the tool will be most welcome.

            

        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Halliday, M.A.K. and Matthiessen
                        2004
                        An Introduction to Functional Grammar, 
                        Arnold
                        London
                    

                    

                        Poe, E. A.
                        1982
                        The Complete Tales and Poems of Edgar Allan Poe, 
                        Penguin Books
                        London
                    

                    

                        Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. N., and Svartvik, J.
                        1992
                        A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language, 
                        Longman
                        London and New York
                    

                    

                        Simpson, P.
                        2004
                        Stylistics: a resource book for students, 
                        Routledge
                        London and New York
                    

                
            
        