 Panel: Virtual Cities/Digital Histories

          Allen, Robert C., 
          University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
          
rallen@email.unc.edu

        

          Smith, Natasha, 
          University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
          
nsmith@email.unc.edu

        

          Lach, Pamella, 
          University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
          
plach@email.unc.edu

        

          Marciano, Richard, 
          University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
          
richard_marciano@unc.edu

        

          Speed, Chris, 
          Edinburgh College of Art, 
          
c.speed@eca.ac.uk

        

          Presner, Todd, 
          UCLA, 
          
presner@humnet.ucla.edu

        

          Ethington, Philip, 
          Univ. of Southern California, 
          
philipje@usc.edu

        

          Shepard, David, 
          UCLA, 
          
shepard.david@gmail.com

        

          Hou, Chien-Yi, 
          University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, United States of
            America, 
          
chienyi@unc.edu

        

          Johanson, Christopher, 
          UCLA, 
          
cjohanson@gmail.com

        

      
        
          
Going to the Show and Main Street, Carolina

          
Robert C. Allen, Natasha Smith, Pamella Lach; University of North Carolina at Chapel
            Hill

          

         (
link
)
   

          

         (
link
)
   

          
Going to the Show documents and illuminates the experience of
            movies and moviegoing in North Carolina from the introduction of projected motion
            pictures (1896) to the end of the silent film era (circa 1930). Through its innovative
            use of more than 1000 digitally stitched and georeferenced Sanborn® Fire Insurance maps
            of forty-five towns and cities between 1896 and 1922, the project situates early
            moviegoing within the experience of urban life in the state's big cities and small
            towns. Supporting its documentation of more than 1300 movie venues across 200
            communities is a searchable archive of thousands of contemporaneous artifacts: newspaper
            ads and articles, photographs, postcards, city directories, and 150 original
            architectural drawings.

          
Main Street, Carolina (in development) is a digital history
            toolkit designed to allow cultural heritage organizations in North Carolina to preserve,
            document, and share the history of their downtowns by creating and managing digital
            content and displaying it on interactive historic maps.

        
        
          
Hypercities

          
Philip J. Ethington, Univ. of Southern California; Todd Presner, Christopher Johanson,
            David Shepard, UCLA

          

         (
link
)
   

          
Built on the idea that every past is a place, HyperCities is a
            digital research and educational platform for exploring, learning about, and interacting
            with the layered histories of city and global spaces. Developed though collaboration
            between UCLA and USC, the fundamental idea behind HyperCities is
            that all stories take place somewhere and sometime; they become meaningful when they
            interact and intersect with other stories. Using Google Maps and Google Earth, HyperCities essentially allows users to go back in time to create
            and explore the historical layers of city spaces in an interactive, hypermedia
            environment. A HyperCity is a real city overlaid with a rich array of geo-temporal
            information, ranging from urban cartographies and media representations to family
            genealogies and the stories of the people and diverse communities who live and lived
            there.

        
        
          
T-RACES


          
Richard Marciano, Chien-Yi Hou; University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

          

         (
link
)
   

          
T-RACES (Testbed for the Redlining Archives of California's
            Exclusionary Spaces) presents Residential Security Maps created by the Home Owners Loan
            Corp in the 1930s for eight cities in California along with supporting documentation.
            These maps categorized specific areas in cities according to four color-coded categories
            based on racial, ethnic and economic characteristics of residents and potential home
            buyers. These so-called “redlining” maps were used by local financial institutions to
            make home mortgage decisions and had a significant impact on the fate of urban
            neighborhoods for decades. The site allows users to view the maps, query a wide range of
            supporting data, and download KML files for use with Google Earth.

        
        
          
Walking Through Time and Tales of Things


          
Chris Speed, Edinburgh College of Art

          

         (
link
)
   

          

         (
link
)
   

          
Walking Through Time is a smart phone web application that
            allows architectural historians, conservationists and tourists to download historical
            maps of Edinburgh when standing in a specific location and to annotate them. They can
            walk through real space whilst following a map from 200 years ago (for example) and tag
            and attach links to the map that offer historical and contextual information.

          
Tales of Things is part of a research project called TOTeM that
            will explore social memory in the emerging culture of the Internet of Things.
            Researchers from across the UK have provided this site as a platform for users to add
            stories to their own treasured objects and to connect to other people who share similar
            experiences. This will enable future generations to have a greater understanding of the
            object’s past and offers a new way of preserving social history. Content will depend on
            real people’s stories, which can be geo-located through an on-line map of the world
            where participants can track their object even if they have passed it on. The object
            will also be able to update previous owners on its progress through a live Twitter feed
            which will be unique to each object entered into the system.

        
      
    