Poster: Extending the Life of the Broadside Ballad: The English Broadside Ballad Archive
               from Microfilm to Color Photography

               Becker, Charlotte, 
               University of California, Santa Barbara, 
               
becker.charlotte@gmail.com

            

               Meyer, Shannon, 
               University of California, Santa Barbara, 
               
meyer.shannon@gmail.com

            
 The English Broadside Ballad Archive (EBBA) is a digital archive housed in the
               English Department of the University of California, Santa Barbara
               (http://ebba.english.ucsb.edu), under the direction of Professor Patricia Fumerton,
               and with funding from three NEH Reference Materials Grants (2006-8, 2008-10, and
               2010-12). English broadside ballads were mass printed from the sixteenth through the
               ninenteenth century; in their “heyday” of the seventeenth century, they were
               multimedia productions that included woodcut images, a poem, and the title of a
               popular tune, to which the poem could be sung. The goal of the EBBA project is to
               recreate for users the lively interaction with these multimedia artifacts that
               approximates how early modern people might have encountered them at the height of
               their popularity. The EBBA archive is especially important because the surviving
               artifacts are extremely fragile and in most cases inaccessible to scholars, let alone
               the general public. The EBBA website provides facsimile images of the broadsides as
               they would have appeared when printed, transcriptions of the poem, facsimile
               transcriptions displaying the poem in the context of the original broadside but
               rendered in modern type, and audio recordings of the ballads being sung. Thanks to
               color images of ballad collections that EBBA has acquired during the past year, the
               EBBA team has begun to add another layer to the archive: now, in addition to
               reflecting the early modern experience with the ballads, EBBA can display the ballads
               as they appear in collections today. 


            
 We propose a multimedia poster presentation demonstrating the long-standing features
               of EBBA, and highlighting our recent acquisition of color images of the Roxburghe
               ballad collection through a contract with the British Library. At the British
               Library, the albums that comprise the Roxburghe collection are not made available to
               the public or even to most scholars because of their fragile condition; however, the
               texts in the collection remain highly important to scholars because they offer
               particular insight into early modern popular culture and demonstrate developments in
               print culture over the three centuries during which the collected ballads were
               printed and circulated. EBBA’s acquisition, manipulation, and mounting of the
               Roxburghe color images is exciting and challenging from both the user and developer
               points of view, and will be the focus of our presentation.


            
For scholarly users of the site, these photographs are important because they show
               the results of the collection process. In the case of the Roxburghe collection, this
               process often involved cutting broadsheets in half and pasting the halves into
               albums, with the two sides of the ballad either on facing pages or one side above the
               other on a single page. Sometimes ballads were pasted sideways into the album, uncut
               and folded at the edges to fit inside the closed album. EBBA has previously, for the
               collection of Pepys ballads, offered microfilm-based black and white images (called
               “ballad facsimiles” on our site) to simulate the appearance of the original whole
               broadside. But adding color images and “album facsimiles,” as in the case of the
               Roxburghe collection, helps EBBA give users a better sense of the long life and
               changing cultural contexts of broadside ballads. One aspect of this long life is the
               handwritten emendations made by collectors and overzealous antiquarians. Whether
               commentary or additions that assist in reading the ballad, these emendations are an
               essential part of understanding the reception and use of the artifacts over time.
               EBBA’s text transcription rules are geared toward providing a searchable, readable
               text of each ballad as it was originally printed, yet the EBBA team wanted to ensure
               that the prolific and often illuminating handwriting in the Roxburghe collection
               could be accessed by users. The color images capture the physical object in great
               detail, rendering the handwriting entirely visible and accessible to scholars wishing
               to read it; thus, users can now see this important feature of the Roxburge ballads
               for themselves.


            
As our presentation will show, these color images have been a unique opportunity for
               the EBBA team to think about our responsibility to present these artifacts in a way
               that balances scholarly utility, visual fidelity, and the EBBA site’s technical
               capability. The British Library’s “Turning the Pages” software and Virtual Books
               webpage is a well-known example of the kind of virtual access to textual artifacts
               that we aim to provide; however, the nature of the Roxburghe albums makes such a
               presentation particularly challenging. We are dealing with albums where the ballads
               were arranged in unpredictable ways when collected, where page discoloration makes
               aesthetic uniformity difficult to achieve, and where parts of the ballads are often
               obscured or distorted by folding or insertion in the albums’ gutter. In addition to
               finding ways to account for these visual aberrations, the EBBA team spent a great
               deal of time deliberating over optimal file size for image delivery and attempting to
               find the most advantageous balance between server speed and image detail. These
               practices and decisions are crucial ones as EBBA continues to acquire color images of
               other ballads, including the Euing collection from the University of Glasgow, and the
               Britwell ballads from the Huntington Library. 


            
 Given the irregular and sometimes haphazard nature of ballad collection, decisions
               such as these will continue to face the EBBA team as the project moves forward with
               these and hopefully other extant collections in the future. We are excited to share
               EBBA’s progress, as well as our dynamic process of decision making, as we continue to
               make early modern broadside ballads available to the public. 


         
      