Poster: The Ethics of Virtual Cultural Representation

					Szabo, Victoria, 
					Duke University, 
					
ves4@duke.edu

				
Spatial/temporal platforms for visualizing humanities data offer scholars new
					ways of representing the people, places, and material objects they study within
					a larger cultural context. These environments can be used to illuminate the
					lives of individual people, groups and objects over time, present archival
					materials in geographical or topological context, model theories of structural
					change over time, and annotate lived experience of the physical world in
					realtime. While digital maps, virtual worlds, and location-based mobile
					applications differ in how they represent information, each has attributes that
					both lend them authority and power, and potentially provoke ethical challenges.
					This project attempts to articulate some of those features in order to develop
					guidelines for ethical rich media map and virtual world construction in the
					humanities. 


				
As digital humanities scholars we sometimes adopt tools created for purposes
					different from our own. It is our responsibility to understand the rhetorical
					effects of the communications strategies we adopt for our teaching and research.
					In the case of spatial/temporal platforms like Google Earth, the built-in
					assumptions about content-presentation rely on consistently abstracted
					information. Because humanities “data” is often heterogeneous, ambiguous,
					incomplete, qualitative and partial, it does not always fit well with a “vector”
					platform that demands specificity. The temptation to assign a point, a line, a
					path, a region, or a date can be powerful when assembling an archive. At the
					same time, the “bitmap” aspects of a rich media environment, both the panoptic
					stitched imagery of satellite views and street views, and the user-generated
					annotations, naturalize and potentially humanize they system’s affect, lending
					it further power as a tool for spatial-temporal representation. 


				
To combat these totalizing tendencies, we can understand our assemblages as
					database driven, hypermediated historical narratives, whose organizing
					principles of space and time offer a thru-line for our content. Doing so
					requires that we show the seams, make the construction produces visible in the
					final product, and allow the user to deconstruct, or drill-down in our
					creations. The separation of presentation and data that is a mainstay for coders
					is difficult to maintain in this context, but is a useful guide when thinking
					about display possibilities. The goal is to reveal the ways in which a map or
					virtual-world based presentation is a coherent, but not exclusive, narrative
					built up out of and illustrated by the materials at hand. Ideally the
					presentation layer can be added onto and changed based on new information,
					additional data, or other perspectives. 


				
This approach to spatial/temporal project creation has implications for how we
					construct, share, and annotate digital map and virtual world based project,
					which will be elaborated here through three examples. Each project includes both
					quantitative and qualitative “data” sources, georeferenced content, and a focus
					on a specific historical or cultural group. While none of these projects are
					specifically ethnographic or documentary in focus, each raises ethical
					challenges for the digital media author representing a populated environment.
					Example Projects: 


				
1. Multimedia Mapping: Muhuru Bay, Kenya, was undertaken by a team of faculty,
					postdocs, students, and community leaders. This complex project involved the
					ISIS Program, Duke Global Health researchers, DukeEngage, a summer enrichment
					program for undergraduates, and the WISER Foundation, an NGO. Some of the issues
					that arose here were around the use of demographic and survey data reflecting
					the local population, testimonials by local children on their lived experience
					as female students in the community, the exposure of selected aspects of the
					local infrastructure, including a latrine quality survey as part of a publicly
					accessible rich media map. This project also involved the creation of what were
					literally the first contemporary maps of the region showing location and sub-
					location boundaries of the various provinces and villages in Muhuru Bay, and
					well as a research study on local children’s perspectives on mapping as part of
					study of the social geographies of AIDS and HIV. 


				
2. “The Walltown Neighborhood History Project,” is a community mapping project,
					involved seventh and eighth grade students in a summer camp-based experience
					which involved overlaying historical census data information and fire insurance
					maps onto a contemporary Google map of their community. This project was
					intended to promote technology literacy among the students, to provide a chance
					for local community members to learn more about their neighborhood’s history and
					contribute their own content, and for Duke researchers to leverage an archive of
					historical “Digital Durham” materials in a highly accessible, public fashion.
					Challenges here include the public presentation of historical data in a public,
					georeferenced context, the presentation of historically racialized demographic
					language to be read in the non-scholarly context of a Google map, the production
					of a local and collective identity for the Walltown residents via expressive and
					quantitative (GIS) data, and the potential exposure of individuals on the public
					web, even granting their informed consent. 


				
3. The “Virtual Haiti Project,” is part of a Humanities Lab focused on Haiti and
					supported by Duke’s Franklin Humanities Institute. Students in a class called
					“Representing Haiti” are asking the question of what it means to create a “Haiti
					Island” in Second Life, and what it is and is not appropriate to model there. We
					need to understand how a geo-referenced constructed environment exceeds the
					bounds of our intentionality, which in this case is to create a Kreyòl language
					learning space and virtual front end to a library of Haiti-related, downloadable
					resources alongside a set of coordinated maps related to visualizing the Haitian
					diaspora. Perhaps more fruitful than direct mirror-world strategies in-world be
					non-representational strategies such as psychogeographies, associative
					place-based meditations, and imaginative transformations or reconstructions. Yet
					why not also a Port-au-Prince StreetView? 

			
		