Poster: The Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory: Infrastructure Development
                    through Partnership

                    Brown, Susan, 
                    University of Guelph, Canada, 
                    
sbrown@uoguelph.ca

                
This poster will outline the strategies for the collaborative infrastructure
                    development, still in progress, of the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory
                    (www.cwrc.ca), and the results of these strategies to date. This project is
                    funded by the Canadian Foundation for Innovation to provide an open web-based
                    environment to foster the use of digital tools and resources for literary
                    studies in and about Canada. At this point when Canada’s literary heritage is
                    moving online, management of information about Canadian literary and cultural
                    history still relies on tools derived from print models, which cannot
                    accommodate the explosion of online materials. CWRC is predicated on the
                    assumption that literary studies will increasingly shift from the model of
                    solitary scholars working on small groups of texts, towards working in
                    increasingly collaborative research environments, whether as individuals or in
                    teams, on larger sets of texts. Its infrastructure is designed to help literary
                    scholars make better use of digital tools in their use by providing an online
                    environment developed in response to current research in the scholarly
                    community. 


                
CWRC is designed around partnerships, whether one is referring to: system
                    components; the aggregation and federation of primary and secondary materials;
                    or the scholarly activity for which the infrastructure is designed. This
                    project’s infrastructure is a combination of computing hardware, software, and
                    personnel to deploy a unique platform, a collaboratory, comprised of two major
                    elements, a database and a toolkit, linked through a web-based service-oriented
                    architecture. This poster outlines the key partnerships built into CWRC’s
                    development plan, using visual diagrams to communicate both the system
                    architecture and the various types of partners and the relationships CWRC has
                    with the various partners involved in the project. 


                
The infrastructure will launch with its repository database, Online Research
                    Canada, or ORCA, already populated with a body of open access “seed” data
                    contributed by partners from existing data currently residing in silos. Some of
                    these projects are long-finished and some ongoing. Federation of data in related
                    partner projects will expand the body of initial materials, giving the
                    Collaboratory both a set of materials on which to test its functionality and a
                    critical mass of data necessary to demonstrate the potential of the new research
                    environment to scholars. A number of partnerships with contributing and pilot
                    projects will ensure that further data is ingested while the technical
                    infrastructure is in its early development stages. 


                
The CWRC environment will be designed to empower online modes of research and
                    collaboration for a community that is not well versed in such collaboration.
                    Anticipated components of the CWRC toolkit include: tools to edit and annotate
                    materials in and (in the case of annotating) beyond ORCA; aids to discovery,
                    mining, and visualization of data; and collaboration and social networking
                    tools. However, with the exception of search engines, none of these tools have
                    been adopted broadly within the community of literary scholars, so partnering
                    with scholars to assess various tools and select amongst 


                
the various possibilities is key. A new scholars group will be crucial to
                    ensuring that we anticipate as far as possible the needs of digital adepts, as
                    well as those of established scholars. Partnerships with established tool
                    providers such as the TAPoR portal and with research projects prototyping
                    second-generation tools for literary studies are key to ensuring the right
                    balance of well-tested and emergent tools. More diffuse partnerships such as use
                    of open-source software are also fundamental to the design of this project. CWRC
                    is extremely fortunate to be partnering with researchers in computing science
                    and other technical fields in the development of some crucial areas such as role
                    and workflow management, social networking, and search, federation, and data
                    mining. 


                
Interface will be a major challenge, since its design will likely have a greater
                    impact than anything else on the degree of scholarly adoption. Our strategy here
                    is to develop first the fundamental components of the system—the repository, the
                    editor, and a role and workflow management system—with very minimal interfaces,
                    and then to work with scholars in our contributing and pilot projects to develop
                    an interface in response to user needs, through an iterative process. 


                
One final, essential element in our infrastructure development is working towards
                    long-term sustainability for the data that scholars will be entrusting to CWRC.
                    Partnership with our host institution’s research library for long-term data
                    curation and preservation is fundamental to that planning, and has had a shaping
                    impact on our infrastructure development. 


                
The poster will outline the results so far of this development strategy, since we
                    will by the time of DH2011 be in the thick of development work. In so doing it
                    will assess the challenges and advantages associated with CWRC’s
                    partner-oriented strategy in relation to each of these areas, and assess the
                    impact of this approach on both infrastructure planning and progress to date.
                

            
        
References:

            
Sample of literature that will be used to contextualize this poster

            
                
                    

                        Brindley. Lynne
                        2002
                         “The Future of Libraries and Humanities Research: New
                            Strategic Directions for the British Library, ” Libraries and Culture, 
                        37.1
                        26-36.
                    


                    

                        Borgman, Christine L.
                         “The Digital Future is Now: A Call to Action for the
                            Humanities, ” 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        Forthcoming
                    


                    

                        Cunningham, Leigh
                         “The Librarian as Digital Humanist: The Collaborative Role
                            of the Research Library in Digital Humanities Projects, ” 
                        University of Toronto Faculty of Information
                            Quarterly, 
                        2.2
                        2010
                    


                    

                        Deegan, Marilyn
                        2006
                        Text Editing in a Digital Environment Follow-up Seminar
                            Report
                        AHRC ICT Methods Network
                    


                    

                        Hughes, Lorna
                        Digital Tools Development for the Arts and Humanities Report
                        AHRC ICT Methods Network
                    


                    

                        Martin, Shawn
                        Digital Scholarship and Cyberinfrastructure in the
                            Humanities: Lessons from the Text Creation Partnership
                        Journal of Electronic Publishing
                        10
                        1
                        January 2007
                    


                    

                        Siemens, Lynne
                        ‘It's a team if you use “reply all” ’: An exploration of
                            research teams in digital humanities environments
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing2009
                    


                    

                        Sustainability of Digital Resources in the Arts and Humanities Expert
                            Seminar Papers
                        AHRC ICT Methods Network
                    


                    

                        Ragaz, Sharon
                        Text Editing in a Digital Environment Rapporteur's Report
                        AHRC ICT Methods Network
                    


                    

                        Unsworth, John
                        Our Cultural Commonwealth: The report of the American
                            Council of Learned Societies Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for the
                            Humanities and Social Sciences
                        New YorkALCS
                        2006
                    


                    
Zorich, Diane M.
                        A Survey of Digital Humanities Centers in the United
                            States
                        Prepared for the Council on Library and Information
                            Resources (CLIR)
                        2007, 2008
                    

                
            
        