Poster: Visualization of Visitor Circulation in Arts and Cultural Exhibition

               Sookhanaphibarn, Kingkarn, 
               Intelligent Computer Entertainment Laboratory, Global COE Program in
                  Digital Humanities for Japanese Arts and Cultures, Ritsumeikan
                  University, 
               
kingkarn@ice.ci.ritsumei.ac.jp

            

               Thawonmas, Ruck, 
               Intelligent Computer Entertainment Laboratory, Global COE Program in
                  Digital Humanities for Japanese Arts and Cultures, Ritsumeikan
                  University, 
               
ruck@ci.ritsumei.ac.jp

            

               Rinaldo, Frank, 
               Intelligent Computer Entertainment Laboratory, Global COE Program in
                  Digital Humanities for Japanese Arts and Cultures, Ritsumeikan
                  University, 
               
rinaldo@is.ritsumei.ac.jp

            
Introduction 


            
The topic of visitor circulation in museums and art galleries has been considered as
               an important factor in all aspects of the museum experience (Bigood, 2006; Guy et al. 2010; Kaynar et al. 2009)
               Circulation describes how visitors explore a set of exhibits in a particular space by
               observing what pathways the visitors take. A visualization of visitor circulation can
               confirm whether visitors circulate the way the designers intended. The visualization
               can assist the designers to arrange a predefined pathway so that visitors will not
               miss key exhibits. The well-designed circulation system can also increase the great
               number of return visitors. 


            
Sookhanaphibarn and Thawonmas (2009) proposed the local and global visualizations
               aims at presentation and analysis of visitor behaviors in 3D virtual museums. The
               visitor path is displayed with a spectrum of colors in the form of connecting
               segments from red to violet. The color of a particular segment indicates the passage
               of time. The drawback of these visualizations is that they were strictly overlaid on
               the layout map. To deal with the varying layouts commonly found in a museum with many
               exhibition rooms, visualizations with an independent layout is an alternative
               assistant tool for the visual analytics of circulation patterns. 


            
In this paper, we proposed a new visualization tool to represent a visitor path and
               his/her time spent residing near the closest item. We encode a time interval residing
               in an item boundary into a color-shaded line segment. Color shade is used as an
               indicator of the proximity to the nearest item. The length of a segment is in
               proportion to the total time spent in the layout. The time segment is placed in the
               row corresponding to its item boundary. A path of visited items is illustrated by
               connecting the time segments with vertical lines. 


            
With the proposed visualization, we can easily find the trend of visitor circulation
               which strictly follows the pathway designed by a curator. The trend is represented by
               the white line, called “Forward”, running from the most left above to the most right
               bottom corners as shown in Figure 1. There are the other trends, which are called
               “Backward”, “Bell” and “Inverted bell”, possibly influenced by the visitor
               characteristics and/or preferences. The similar trends of visitor circulation will be
               explained later in detail. 


            

               

                  
Figure 1: Four trends of circulation: (a) Forward, (b) Backward, (c) Bell,
                     and (d) Inverted bell. 

                  
Full Size Image 

               

            
               
Layout-dependent visualization 


               
Most visualization techniques using traditional two dimensional maps represent
                  visitor trajectories and their corresponding visit time directly over spatial
                  layouts. In this paper, we call layout-dependent visualization as any
                  visualization technique using the spatial layout of a target area as its graphical
                  background in visualization. With the layout-dependent visualization, a
                  circulation pattern is not easily extracted by a user who is not familiar with the
                  target layout map. 


               
The layout-dependent visualization approach burdens users with a cost of requiring
                  them to recognize the layout of items and routes by themselves. Some additional
                  symbols indicating the position and boundary of items as well as arrowheads
                  indicating representative routes must be placed in layout-dependent visualization.
                  However, these symbols and arrowheads conceal visitor traces from users. 

            
         
         
            
Design Decision 


            
This paper considers the use of a layout-independent display for visual analysis of
               the path and residing time of the movement data in circulation, named “PARTY”. PARTY
               is an abbreviation of Path And Residing Time display. Taking for example a museum in
               a 3D virtual world, the circulation behaviors of visitors moving through museum of
               interest are influenced by the items on which the visitors focus their attention. 


            
Designers of a musuem space require serveral types of information when examining the
               circulation behavior of visitors. These include (1) residing locations, regions, or
               item boundaries, (2) visit time intervals near an item, (3) paths of visited regions,
               (4) global information showing multiple visitors residing in a region, and (5)
               degrees of their interest. All of these information types are derived from two data
               sources: (a) a log file of visitors’ positions including x-y coordinates and time and
               (b) the map of a museum or a floor plan, where the location of items or the position
               of rooms is provided at least. 


            
The design of PARTY aims to represent three dimensional entities, i.e. a time unit, a
               visited item, and a visitor. The horizontal and vertical axes of PARTY represent time
               and items which visitor moves through their boundaries. A stack of visitor stripes is
               put inside an item block (row). As shown in Figure 2, there are five items of
               interest and three visitors. The stack of three visitor stripes places inside each
               item row. The order of three visitor stripes is consistent thorough five item rows.
               Therefore, an PARTY entity represents a visitor v who stays near item X at time t. 


            

               

                  
Figure 2: A structural design of PARTY.

                  
Full Size Image 

               
            

            
We arrange the visitor stripes in every stack in the same order and rank them by the
               similarity among their present circulation patterns. Then, we use the hierarchical
               clustering technique for finding the similarity of all pairs of visitor paths. To
               handle hundreds of visitors, the representative of each group of visitors can be used
               rather than a single visitor. The representative is derived from the generalized
               median defined as the visitor path having the nearest distances to all. 


            
Besides a path of nearest items versus time, the proximity distance to the nearest
               item can be displayed in PARTY as a degree of visitor’s interest to each exhibit
               item. A displaying color is computed using the observation distance and range based
               on the location of all items. For example, given the visitor trace as shown in Figure
               3, Figure 4 represents a visitor trace as our observation-based time series. The
               visualization in Figure 4 consists of the horizontal axis corresponding to the visit
               time, the vertical axis indicating an item belonging to the observation range at a
               particular time, and the color showing the observation distance. This visualization
               is produced by using the observation distance and range in the application of a 3D
               virtual museum. 


            

                  
Figure 3: A representation of a visitor trace tracked in a 3D virtual
                     museum. 

                  
Full Size Image 

               
               

                  
Figure 4: Transformation of a single trace (Fig 3.) to PARTY representing
                     the path of visited items (y-axis) and his/her interest to items by using color
                     shades from brightness to darkness (highest to lowest degrees).

                  
Full Size Image 

               
            

         


         
            
Results and Implications 


            
This section presents an application of PARTY analyzing the avatars’ trajectories and
               finding trends of circulation behaviors in the 3D virtual museum, named RDAP. RDAP,
               owned by the Global Center of Excellenct in Digital Humanities Center for Japanese
               Arts and Cultures, of Ritsumeikan University, was created in Second Life. An
               objective of RDAP is to disseminate Japanese costumes, Kimonos, preserved them in a
               digital achieving system. We synthesize the visitor trajectories based on the
               metaphor of four animals as mentioned in (Sookhanaphibarn and Thawonmas, 2009). The
               total number of synthesized trajectories is 36 where each visiting style has nine
               trajectories. 

            
               
Similar Trends of Circulation Patterns 


               
After applying the PARTY approach, visitor trajectories are transformed into time
                  series data. Discovering similar trends of circulation patterns is achieved by a
                  traditional dynamic time warping followed by the hierarchical clustering. Then,
                  generalized median of each resulting cluster is calculated. Figure 1 shows four
                  trends of circulation patterns including: 


               

                  
a) Forward circulation: this trend illustrates that visitors prefer to turn
                     right at entrance and move following the curators-guided path from the the fist
                     to the last items. 


                  
b) Backward circulation: the direction of this circulation is backward from
                     the forward one, i.e. turn left at the beginning. 


                  
c) Bell-shape circulation: visitors in this trend prefer to start and end
                     their visit with the same item, and they turn right at entrance. 


                  
d) Inverted bell-shape circulation: This trend pattern is similar to the
                     bell circulation but they turn left at entrance. 


               

               
The other view of PARTY displays a stack of representative stripes of which the
                  width denotes the size of their categories. The bell-shape circulation has the
                  largest number of visitors followed by the backward, forward, and inverted
                  bell-shape circulations, respectively. 

            
         
      
References:

         
            
               
Bitgood, S
                  2006
                   “An Analysis of Visitor Circulation: Movement Patterns and the
                     General Value Principle, ” Curator: The Museum
                     Journal, 
                  49: 463–475
                  
         (
link
)
   
               


               
Guy, G.
                  Dunn, S.
                  Gold, N.
                  2010
                   “Capturing Visitor Experiences for Study and
                     Preservation, ” Digital Humanities 2010, Conference
                     Abstracts Book, 
                  2
                  160-16


               
Kaynar, I.R.
                  Psarra, S.
                  Wineman J.
                  2009
                   “Experiencing museum gallery layouts through local and global
                     visibility properties in morphology: an inquiry on the YCBA, the MoMA and the
                     HMA, ” 
                  Proc. 7th International Space Syntax Symposium, 
                  Stockholm, Sweden, 
                  June 2009
                  pp. 1-16


               
Sookhanaphibarn, K.
                  Thawonmas, R.
                  2010
                   “Visualization and Analysis of Visiting Styles in 3D Virtual
                     Museums, ” 
                  Digital Humanities 2010, Conference Abstracts
                     Book, 239-243
               

            
         

      