Tutorial: Integrating Digital Humanities Projects into the Undergraduate
                    Curriculum

                    Tomasek, Kathryn, 
                    Wheaton College, 
                    
ktomasek@wheatonma.edu

                

                    Davis, Rebecca Frost, 
                    National Institute for Technology in Liberal
                    Education, 
                    
rdavis@nitle.org

                
Digital methods of analysis exert growing influence on the practice of many
                    disciplines in the humanities and social sciences, yet students majoring in
                    non-science disciplines often have little exposure to computational thinking.
                    Although digital scholarship has become more pervasive among humanists, we have
                    yet to recognize fully the value that collaboration with undergraduates can
                    bring to projects in this field.

                
The aim of this workshop is to invite digital humanists to work together in
                    considering how to integrate digital scholarship into undergraduate or general
                    introductory level graduate courses.  Potential motivations include:

                
                    
advancing digital humanities within the academy, especially at the
                        undergraduate level,

                    
linking scholarship and teaching to move forward a faculty member’s own
                        project,

                    
engaging students in humanities research through technology,

                    
developing digital literacy to help students function well as citizens in
                        the twenty-first century.

                
                
This workshop will present strategies for effectively integrating digital
                    projects into undergraduate courses. By examining cases of assignments linked to
                    digital projects, participants will consider how to make room for such
                    assignments in a syllabus, how to tie digital projects to a course’s learning
                    outcomes, and how to scaffold both technological and content learning to allow
                    students to make positive contributions to a project external to the course.
                    Participants will leave with a set of pedagogical strategies for thinking about
                    digital projects, preliminary plans for assignments for their own courses, and
                    suggestions for how to find collaborative partners in library and technology
                    services for such projects on their home campuses.

                
Part One: Rebecca Frost Davis will present an overview of
                    ways that digital humanities projects have been integrated into the curriculum,
                    contextualized through the pedagogical approach of problem-based learning and
                    the principles of liberal education.  Participants will look at a variety of
                    examples, including the 
Homer Multitext
                        Project
, 
SmartChoices
, and the
                        
NINES Collex
.

                
Part Two: Kathryn Tomasek will present a case study from
                    the Wheaton College Digital History Project.  A transcription and encoding
                    assignment, this module can be dropped into multiple courses.  It includes
                    scaffolded assignments; a teaching collaboration that involves a faculty member,
                    a technologist, and an archivist; and multiple opportunities for students to
                    create and use new historical data whilst contributing to larger digital history
                    projects.

                
Part Three:  Participants will brainstorm and workshop
                    assignments for their own courses in breakout groups.  Discussion will center on
                    three areas, practical questions about how to integrate assignments into a
                    course, how to pace and scaffold work on digital projects, and questions about
                    collaborative pedagogy.  The workshop will conclude with discussion of
                    individual assignment ideas from the small groups.

            
            
                
Presenters

                
The organizers bring to the workshop fifteen years’ combined experience in
                    integrating technology projects into the undergraduate curriculum.   Rebecca
                    Frost Davis, Program Officer for the Humanities at the National Institute for
                    Technology in Liberal Education (NITLE), has been teaching faculty development
                    workshops on the effective pedagogical application of technology since 2002.
                     Currently, she heads NITLE’s initiative in digital humanities and researches
                    the growth of the field at small liberal arts colleges.  Kathryn Tomasek,
                    Associate Professor of History at Wheaton College in Massachusetts, has been
                    using the Text Encoding Initiative in her courses since fall 2004.  She is
                    Co-Director of the Wheaton College Digital History Project, a long-term
                    digitization project that has employed students as summer research assistants
                    and now includes a transcription and markup module that Tomasek uses in multiple
                    courses for advanced-level History majors.  Davis and Tomasek will offer the
                    workshop described here as a Bootcamp at THATCamp LAC, June 4-5, 2011, at St.
                    Norbert College in De Pere, Wisconsin.

            
        
References:

            
                
                    

                        Blackwell, C.
                        Martin, T. R.
                        2009
                         “Technology, collaboration, and undergraduate
                            research, ” 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        3(1)
                        14 March 2011
                        
         (
link
)
   
                    

                    

                        Cavanagh, S.
                        2010
                         “Bringing our brains to the humanities: increasing the value
                            of our classes while supporting our futures, ” 
                        Pedagogy, 
                        10(1)
                        131-142
                        
         (
link
)
   
                        14 March 14, 2011
                    

                
            
        