 Panel: The Theory and Design of PlotVis

                    Dobson, Teresa M., 
                    University of British Columbia, Canada, 
                    
teresa.dobson@ubc.ca

                

                    Ruecker, Stan, 
                    The University of Alberta, 
                    
sruecker@ualberta.ca

                

                    Brown, Monica, 
                    
mm2brown@interchange.ubc.ca

                    University of British Columbia, Canada, 
                

                    Rodriguez, Omar, 
                    
omar.rodrigueza@gmail.com

                    The University of Alberta, 
                

                    Michura, Piotr, 
                    
zemichur@cyf-kr.edu.pl

                    Academy of Fine Arts, Krakow, Poland, 
                

                    Grue, Dustin, 
                    
dgrue@shaw.ca

                    University of British Columbia, Canada, 
                

            
                
                    
PlotVis is a 3D system for people interested in examining narrative action,
                        or plot, from a variety of perspectives. The system was developed as one
                        outcome of a funded study examining the teaching of complex narrative forms
                        in secondary and undergraduate classrooms. Results of this study have
                        revealed, inter alia, that conventional approaches to teaching fiction,
                        particularly at the secondary level, fail to take account of the diversity
                        of contemporary narrative (cf Dobson, 2006).

                    
For example, instructors, particularly at the secondary level, still rely
                        heavily on the five-stage plot mapping first described by Gustav Freytag
                        (1863) in Die Technik des Dramas (
Figure
                            1
), and the superimposition of this model on forms beyond those it
                        was originally intended to describe can be misleading (Dobson, Michura,
                        Ruecker, 2010). 

                            
Figure 1: Freytag’s Pyramid shows five basic components of plot,
                                based on Greek and Shakespearean tragedy.

                            
Full Size Image 

                         In addition, the reliance on the Cartesian graph to model
                        narrative generally – and there are a number of examples of such graphing
                        (e.g., Sterne, 1847; Vonnegut, 1973) – is restricting because it fails to
                        take account of the multiple dimensions of story.
                    
Considering the limitations of the Cartesian graph for modeling narrative
                        along with conceptualizations of narrative as multidimensional (e.g.,
                        Shields, 2000), our goal was to produce a three-dimensional digital
                        environment that reifies different perspectives on plot, so that students
                        and other scholars can quickly shift from one 3D object to another, or spend
                        time exploring any of the visualizations in more detail. We currently
                        support three perspectives and are beginning to experiment with the design
                        of a fourth.

                    
This panel will examine the results of the PlotVis project from several
                        different perspectives, including an introduction to the project, schema
                        design for narrative encoding, a reading practices study, and design and
                        programming.

                
                
                    
Introduction to PlotVis as a Form of Distant Reading

                    
 … what we really need is a little pact with the devil: we know how to
                            read texts, now let’s learn how not to read them. Distant reading: where
                            distance, let me repeat it, is a condition of knowledge: it allows you
                            to focus on units that are much smaller or much larger than the text:
                            devices, themes, tropes—or genres and systems. (Moretti, 2000, p.
                            57).

                    
Recently, literary theorists and digital humanists alike have taken up
                        Moretti’s appeal, later developed in Graphs, Maps,
                            Trees (2005), for the development of new methods of textual
                        analysis. Clement (2008), for example, uses mapping techniques and
                        visualizations to facilitate, quite literally, new perspectives on a
                        canonical text, Gertrude Stein’s The Making of
                            Americans. By premising knowledge on distance rather than
                        closeness, Clement discerns significant patterns in the narrative’s
                        structure, in so doing discovering a new logic to Stein’s text. Such new
                        insights, made possible by adapting the scale and focus of textual analysis,
                        are exactly what Moretti expects readers will earn by learning how not to
                        read texts—and, by extension, by learning how to use different technologies
                        to complement, and corroborate, our readings of texts.

                    
 Experiments with distant reading challenge the truism that readers make
                        sense of a story by seizing upon a narrative episode, using it as a key to
                        gain entry into the deeper meaning inherent within the text, “as if meaning
                        resided in a buried treasure chest or behind a lock door” (Clement, 2008, p.
                        365). Clement proposes a different metaphor for understanding narrative
                        structure, that of a map key, which instead implies that readers make sense
                        of stories by using narrative structure as a guide. The metaphor of the map
                        key offers a view of reading complex narrative as a process of orientation,
                        through which readers manage their awareness of a text’s meanings by
                        acquainting themselves with its structure.

                    
Similar views of distant reading and complex narrative inform the project of
                        developing XML schemas for encoding digitized versions of fictional
                        narratives. Undertaken as part of a larger study based out of the University
                        of British Columbia, this project investigates, and proposes, methods of
                        reading adapted to contemporary print and digital fiction’s “shift away from
                        conventional narrative logic toward indeterminacy, fragmentation, and
                        open-endedness” (Dobson, 2008, p. 1). While the goal of our larger study is
                        the development of new models for writing, reading, and teaching complex
                        print and digital narrative, the focus here will be the use of XML to encode
                        fictional narratives as, in itself, a form of textual analysis, involving
                        both closeness and distance, and enabling even further alterations, of the
                        kind Moretti proposes, to the scale and focus of scholarly reading
                        practices. 


                
                
                    
Towards a Schema Design for Narrative Encoding 

                    
This paper will discuss the iterative development and use of a set of
                        Extensible Markup Language (XML) schemas for encoding digitized versions of
                        fictional narratives. Although the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) Guidelines
                        for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange define and document a thorough
                        markup language for encoding humanities texts, including significant
                        provisions for encoding scholarly editions of drama, poetry, and
                        manuscripts, there presently exist only a handful of XML schemas designed
                        specifically for marking up literary fiction (e.g., StoryML, FicML, PftML). 

                    
Drawing on principles and approaches from narratology, our literary encoding
                        schemas combine TEI elements and attributes with tags that specifically mark
                        up elements of narrative structure, such as actions, characters, dialogue,
                        narration, objects, places, and time. Examples of encoded short stories,
                        such as Alice Munro’s “The Love of a Good Woman” and Ernest Hemingway’s
                        “Hills Like White Elephants,” will be used to demonstrate, and critique, the
                        different possibilities we have explored for developing literary XML
                        schemas. 


                
                
                    
From Envisaging to Visualization: Young People’s Narrative Reading
                        Practices

                    
This paper will present findings of a study examining the reading practices
                        of young adults. The study focused on the dialectic between how students of
                        literature envisage narrative and how they actually
                        visualize it in systematized approaches. Fifty participants in grades 11 and
                        12 read Hemingway’s “Hills Like White Elephants” and O’Faolain’s “The
                        Trout.” They then engaged in a series of activities: evaluating form by
                        physically “cutting and pasting” a narrative’s text, sketching narrative
                        diagrams, XML tagging of narratives, and an exit interview.

                    
Participants indicated that narratives were enjoyable because their plots
                        were “unexpected,” but also un-enjoyable because they were “hard to
                        understand.” That is, comprehension of a narrative is a condition of
                        enjoyment and disappointment: narratives ought to be original but not
                        confusing. In XML tagging, grade 11 students were given a basic schema to
                        tag a narrative but were also encouraged to modify this schema. The schemas
                        were altered beyond a systematized approach, instead revealing critical
                        activity across a range of “levels.” Globally, for example, subjects
                        modified the schemas beyond a “systematic” approach in order to highlight
                        salient features particular to a text. Subjects added the tags setting and contradictory
                            statements to the XML schema for “Hills,” suggesting a
                        post-critical (and almost juridical) attitude. More locally, there is
                        evidence that tagging is dependent on “spheres of lexical activity,” where
                        tagging of features depends on the immediate context in which they occur.
                        Furthermore, tagging appears to be not only independent of syntax, but also
                        independent of the tagged-narrative’s grammar – subjects prescribe
                        systematic rules, but do not follow them.


                
                
                    
PlotVis: Design and Implementation of Five Plot Models

                    
Our final panelists will discuss issues related to designing and programming
                        four different views of narrative structure. In the first case, the user is
                        able to see a Fibonacci series where one of the encoded plot elements is
                        placed at the centre of the visualization, and other elements are arranged
                        out from the centre, either sequentially as they appear in the text or else
                        hierarchically as they are arranged in the XML tree (
Figure 2
). 

                            
Figure 2: This screenshot of Munro’s “Love of a Good Woman”
                                demonstrates the complexity of the tagging, with each coloured
                                cylinder representing one of roughly 7000 tagged pieces of
                                text.

                            
Full Size Image 

                         In this visualization, each piece of text appears as a coloured
                        cylinder. The height of the cylinders can be associated with the length of
                        the text they contain. The second visualization privileges sequence over
                        centrality, with multiple pipelines representing the characters or narrator,
                        and changes to the arrangement of the pipe showing where changes in time
                        occur (
Figure 3
). 

                            
Figure 3: Our design sketch for a view that privileges sequence
                                over centrality, with multiple pipelines representing the characters
                                or narrator.

                            
Full Size Image 

                         The third visualization is based on an architectural metaphor,
                        where readers see the different kinds of encoded plot elements as floors of
                        a building (
Figure 4
). 

                            
Figure 4: Our design sketch of the architectural concept of story
                                visualization.

                            
Full Size Image 

                         Text that occurs only within a single element tag fills a space on
                        a single floor, while text that spans multiple elements appears as blocks
                        that span the floors. Our fourth and most recent design resembles in some
                        ways our sequential model, only in this case the text is represented by
                        vertical walls of text that bend at locations where there are changes in
                        time, while the other encoded plot elements appear as colours on the
                        surfaces of the walls (
Figure
                            5
).

                            
Figure 5: This screenshot shows the wall display. Vertical
                                coloured bands represent the encoded text elements that are shown as
                                nodes in Figure 2.

                            
Full Size Image 

                         The visualization system was created using a popular game engine,
                        called Unity3D, which provides us with a flexible platform for interaction
                        with 3D objects, primarily through writing Javascript. The contents of the
                        visualization, as indicated above, are produced from XML-encoded text
                        files.
                

            
            
References:

                
                    
                        

                            Clement, T. E.
                            2008
                             “‘A thing not beginning and not ending’: using digital
                                tools to distant-read gertrude stein’s the making of
                                americans, ” 
                            Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                            23(3)
                            361-381
                            Dobson, T.M.
                            2008
                            Reading, Writing, and Teaching Complex
                                Narrative, 
                            Standard Research Grant Application submitted to the
                                Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada., 
                        


                        

                            Dobson, T. M.
                            2006
                             “For the love of a good narrative: Digitality and
                                textuality, ” 
                            English Teaching: Practice and Critique, 
                            5(2)
                            56-68
                        


                        

                            Dobson, T. M.
                            Michura, P.
                            Ruecker, S.
                            2010
                             “Visualizing plot in 3D, ” 
                            Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
                                Digital Society, 
                        


                        

                            Freytag, G.
                            1863/1983
                            Die technik des dramas, 
                        


                        

                            Hemingway, E.
                            1927
                            Men Without Women, 
                        


                        

                            Jessop, M.
                            2008
                             “Digital visualization as a scholarly activity, ” 
                            Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                            23(3)
                            281-293
                        


                        

                            McCarty, W.
                            2002
                             “Humanities computing: essential problems, experimental
                                practice, ” 
                            Literary and Linguistic Computing , 
                            17(1)
                            103-125
                        


                        

                            Moretti, F.
                            2005
                            Graphs, maps, trees: Abstract models for a literary
                                theory, 
                        


                        

                            Munro, A.
                            1998
                            The love of a good woman, 
                        


                        

                            O'Faolain, S.
                            1980
                             “The trout, ” 
                            Collected stories. (Vol. I), 
                            383-386
                        


                        

                            Shields, C.
                            2000
                             ““Ilk”, ” 
                            Dressing up for the carnival, 
                            53-60
                        


                        

                            Sterne, L.
                            1847
                            The works of Laurence Sterne, containing the life and
                                opinions of Tristram Shandy, gentleman, 
                        


                        

                            Van Peer, W.
                            Chatman, S. B.
                            2001
                            New perspectives on narrative perspective, 
                        


                        

                            Vonnegut, K.
                            1973
                            Breakfast of champions, 
                        



                    

                

            
        