Poster: A System for Referencing Personal Names through Iconography and Sharing an
               Authoritative Information Source for Personal Names by API 

               Togiya, Norio, 
               University of Tokyo, 
               
togiya.norio@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp

            

               Kawashima, Takanori, 
               Tokyo Institute of Technology, 
               
t_kawa@valdes.titech.ac.jp

            
Abstract

            
In this research, we constructed an ontology-based name authority file using a topic
               map, and then, using API and other Web services, we looked into using this with
               navigational systems .The name authority file was created and provided through API
               services. By using this service, it is possible for developing navigation and
               analyzing tool of Digital Cultural Heritages to have a comprehensive name list of
               historic personal names and artists. These API are used for Digital Cultural
               Heritages of digitized anthropological material, old photographs. 

         
         
            
Introduction 


            
While there have heretofore been various forms of Digital Cultural Heritage, even for
               digitized and stored materials it has been typical to select materials through a list
               or by alphabetical search. However, in situations such as for historical documents,
               it is preferable to be able to select materials by searching for documents that deal
               with related individuals, social organizations, historical events or periods. In
               particular, a proper noun should be controlled as authority file. 


            
For this reason, in this study, an ontology-based name authority file —which defines
               the relationship between people, organizations and places—was created. And the
               information was stored in standardized ontology language. We adopted Topic Maps for
               constructing name authority file and API system providing it for digital cultural
               heritage. 


            
There are some examples of ontology-based name authority file using Topic Map. The
               unique features of this study is visualizing ontology-based name authority file using
               Topic Map and providing it with API. In this paper, we will describe in detail. 

         

         
            
Definition of Ontology 


            
An important goal of this archive is to select and view each material through an
               understanding of the various materials and the relationship between the
               characteristics related to them. To achieve this, we decided to use ontology relating
               the various items in this project: 


                  
Defining concepts, characteristics, and meanings of various items


                  
Aiming at systematizing various concepts and items in the world


                  
Aiming at generality, which makes materials reusable, and shared
                     knowledge


                  
Describing items with rules and in a language based on certain
                     regulations


               
            
In Greek, ontology originally means existence and has been frequently used in
               philosophy. However, with the development of the study of artificial intelligence and
               knowledge engineering since the late 20th century, it began to be used as a term
               referring to a semantic systematization method for various items in the world in
               order to facilitate its understanding by machines. Meanwhile, when the Semantic Web
               was proposed by Tim Berners-Lee as a more effective method to connect fragments of
               information on the Web through the spread of the Internet in the late 1990s, ontology
               was used as a term to refer to the methodology used to describe content created on
               the Web with more regulated rules and language. 


            
Various types of ontologies have been developed through the course of time, such as
               ―Upper ontology aiming at the systematization of various items in the world based on
               philosophical discussions, Domain ontology developed to express the edifice of
               knowledge in a specific domain (mainly for industrial use), and Web ontology
               developed to systematize information and knowledge on the Web. 


            
“Upper ontology and Domain ontology are provided to construct concepts 1), 3), and 4)
               aiming at 2) defined above. Web ontology initially had the practical purpose to
               develop item 4) in order to define the relationship between information items on
               creating contents using method 1) to achieve item 3), which can be seen in the
               combination of the Dublin Core and RDF technologies. The ontology of CIDOC CRM –used
               to describe the metadata of cultural resources–seems to belong to this type. Recent
               advances made in Web ontology aim at the semantic systematization of content on the
               Web, which was its initial objective. In this context, it may be said that it has
               advanced in the area of item 2) by replacing the world with the Web. However, how the
               system of the concepts on the Web and that of the things in the real world are
               unified as the former is a reflection on the latter remains to be seen. 


            
This study systematizes item 2) for historical information with method 1) in
               anticipation of the union of these in the future and aims at item 3) by using item
               4), which can be unified with Web ontology, etc. in the future. As for now, we are
               mainly focusing on implementing items 1) and 2). In particular, we designed name
               authority file based on the above mentioned definition on ontology. 

         

         
            
Constructing Ontology Using Topic Map 

            
               
Introduction about Topic Map 


               
We adopted topic map to constructing above mentioned ontology-based name authority
                  file. Topic maps that represent ontology use the ISO/IEC JTC1 SC34 established ISO
                  standard, which is still being revised, but as of April 2009 some parts have not
                  yet received JIS standardization. Topic maps are a technique for classifying,
                  organizing and making easily visible information and knowledge, and play a role
                  similar to the index of a book for displaying information in space. It is possible
                  to model and process the relations between subjects in the problematic areas,
                  relations between information resources, such as Topics, Association and
                  Occurrence with a computer. 


               
In order to identify and discern the subjects, topic maps have a mechanism known
                  as PSI (Published Subject Identifier). PSI, as a subject identifier, allocates and
                  publicizes a unique IRI (Internationalized Resource Identifier) to each subject.
                  Placed above the indicated address of the IRI, and serving as a descriptive
                  information resource is the Published Subject Indicator, or PSD (Published Subject
                  Descriptor), which allows the understanding of what the subject represents. For
                  this project, as PSI was used, subjects were not given their own name or alias;
                  rather they could be identified and discerned by their IRI. 

            
            
               
Creation of Topic Map 


               
Information relating to the photographer, scholar and noble family was collected
                  to use navigation and analyzing for old photograph. Especially for information
                  that needs to be shared, information necessary for multiple people is gathered.
                  Information gathered in this manner is described in the creation of topic maps. 


               
Information gathered by multiple people is shown in table 1 under the entries of
                  "name," "reading," "nationality," "occupation," "birth and death," "biography,"
                  "hometown," "place of residence," "attached organization / group" and "title."
                  These items are candidates for topics when creating the topic map. After
                  completion of the topic map, navigation will become possible based on these
                  subjects. 


               
The three elements of which Topic maps are composed are mainly used to express a
                  variety of subjects (topics), express relations between topics (Associations), and
                  to link information resources related to topics (Occurrences). 


               
These structures are adapted as shown in Table 1. The names, various related
                  items, and reciprocal relations of items regarding the ontology at first can be
                  thought of as topics for topic maps. Also, for name sources, each "person" and
                  "place" and the relation among people (Associations) is adapted. Furthermore, as
                  links to specific information resources, "birth and death," "biography," "related
                  URL/URI" etc., correspond to appearance (Occurrences). 


               
In addition, it is possible to classify information stored for these (Topics),
                  (Associations) and (Occurrences). For the first topic (Topics) various "forms"
                  were established; Topic Types, which represents the topic "form," for
                  (Associations), defining the relation type are Association Types and Association
                  Role Types, and for (Occurrence), Occurrence Types expresses the type of
                  appearance. 


               
The specific items of these "forms" can be expressed, for Topic Types, "Country,"
                  "Person," "place name," "organization/group," and "occupation" etc. 


               
Furthermore, Association Types are established showing various relations such as
                  "friendship relation," "marital relation," "student/teacher relation," "workplace
                  relation", and "filial relation," Association Role Types express the role of each
                  topic that produces relations, such as "significant role," "brother (sister)
                  role," "wife role," "child role," and "pupil role," etc. 


               
Next, Occurrence Types are established, "reading of name," "reading of surname,"
                  "name in roman alphabet," "surname in roman alphabet," "personal relationship,"
                  "relationship period," "birthplace," "source," "role," etc. Based on these items
                  information is structured. 


               
Personal topics such as parent-child relation, fraternal relation, matrimonial
                  relation, friendship association etc. are expressed through the lines leading into
                  and out of the personal topics. 


               
After creating the topic map, based on these forms queries and navigation are
                  possible, and compared to semantic processing more meaningful searches can be
                  conducted. 


               
Table 1. Major Components of the Topic Map 


                  
Categories of personal name authority information  


                     
Correspondence in Topic Map  

                   
Name  


                     
Topic Name  

                   
 ID  


                     
SubjectID  

                   
Related URL/URI  


                     
External occurrence  

                   
Dates of birth and death  


                     
Internal occurrence  

                   
Brief biography  


                     
Internal occurrence  

                   
Place of birth (multiple responses possible)  


                     
Linked by association to other topics  

                   
Place of residence (multiple responses possible)  


                     
Linked by association to other topics  

                   
Relationship (multiple responses possible)  


                     
Association  

                   
An Overview of Iconographic Analysis Using Authoritative Information. 


            
In this study, as shown in Fig. 1, an ontology-based name authority file was
               constructed, and that information was distributed through API. For name authority
               file, focusing on photographers, scholars and noble family, roughly 3000 names were
               entered into a DB system. This authoritative personal name information was mainly
               made from standardized reference materials used in museums, libraries and archives,
               and created from element sets which allowed the sharing of information in this study,
               and API was added to the database to enable external searching. In addition, as an
               external system a picture annotator was created using this API. 

                  
Figure. 1. Mutual Relationships among Topics 


                  
Full Size Image 

               
            

            
In this study, a simple API was designed to make personal information taken from a
               reference DB searchable. By using this API, it is possible to use even personal name
               information controlled by an external system. 


            
There were four Parameters that could be used (personal name, birth year and year of
               death, family, personal ID) to search, and the eight types of data that could be
               obtained from search were (personal name, personal ID, birth year or year of death,
               family, biography, related individuals and their relations, and source). It was
               possible to identify even people and families that had a unique ID, as well as
               individuals who shared the same name. Furthermore, by using the controlling ID,
               semantic interchange with an independent external system could be made possible. 


            
The goal of the current design is not to have all fields of the DB searchable by
               semantic search, but to provide those fields thought to be frequently utilized by
               external applications simply. If a higher order search is desired, it can be
               performed from the editing UI of the authoritative information DB. The XML-RPC was
               used for the API protocol. 

         
         
            
Designing Name Autholity File for Navigation and Analysing Image 


            
In the last section, we constructed an ontology-based name authority file using a
               topic map. It is possible to use these to confirm interpersonal relationships and
               relationships between people and organizations while looking at a graph. In this
               research, we constructed a name authority file concerning scholar, photographers,
               etc. with a topic map. Fig 1 is a graph showing these people’s interpersonal
               relationships and their relationships. This chart mainly shows the relationships
               between the parties in relation to the anthropology materials. In this way, it is
               possible to use a personal name information authority using topic maps for navigation
               systems. 

                  
Figure. 2. Relationship among photographers 

                  
Full Size Image 

                Fig 2 is a graph showing relationships of photographers. Also, as shown in
               Fig 3, it is possible to show detailed information regarding these personal names,
               etc. by clicking on the personal name icons. 


                  
Figure. 3. Name Authority File

                  
Full Size Image 

               

            
Furthermore, it is possible to assign annotations to the materials, as well as to
               assign personal name information which has been regulated by the topic maps. It is
               also possible to provide information to the annotations using the regulated personal
               name information. With this, it is possible to search through material annotation
               information from the personal name information that has been regulated by the topic
               maps. 


            
It is possible to combine this topic mapped personal name information with the
               digital cultural heritage main body, but it is also possible to put it to use through
               API. By using API, it is possible to use this information for navigation and
               annotation with other digital cultural heritages. This makes it possible to regulate
               the information and analyze the materials using information which defines the
               relationships. 


         

         
            
Results and Issues 


            
As seen above, ontology-based name authority file utilizing topic map and API for
               Digital Cultural Heritage was explained through application. In this study,
               ontology-based name authority file was constructed. By using topic maps, related
               people, can be clarified, and materials can be viewed. And API accelerated
               utilization of name authority file 


            
In addition, by allocating URI to personal topics, personal identification can be
               performed by URI, not just by name, and by using the merge feature it is possible to
               share data from other topic maps. Also, by publishing with PSI information can be
               shared by other RDF and topic maps. For IRI, which kinds of character strings are
               appropriate is a matter for future consideration. 


            
Concerning visualization, as demonstrated in fig. 2, visualization of relationships
               is possible. However, this causes problems such as the difficulty in recognizing
               relations that appear between more than three topics to arise. This problem also
               occurs with other viewers, and further study is necessary. 


            
It is also necessary to consider whether and how to share the topic map created for
               this project with other projects and databases. As mentioned earlier, as each topic
               is given a universal URI, it is necessary to consider how it is necessary to link to
               other topic maps. 


            
Furthermore, for this project, previously created information was converted into a
               topic map, but in the future it will be necessary to design a system to handle
               increased topics for Digital Cultural Heritage. Along with the need to store more
               materials, a system to increase information is necessary. 

         
      
References:

         
            
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


            
I would like to give special thanks to Motomu Naito (Knowledge Synergy Inc), Hirotada
               Kobayashi (Cooba Corp). 


         
         

            

               

                  
         (
link
)
   
               



               
Kivelä, A.
                  Lyytinen, O.
                   “Case study: publishing large collection of artworks using Topic
                     Maps, ” 
                  Topic Maps Users Conference, 
                  Oslo, 
                  2007
               


               
Norio TOGIYA
                  Akira BABA
                   “Constructing Integrated Digital Archive Using Ontology and User
                     Community, ” 
                  Archives & Museum Informatics, ICHIM07 International Cultural
                     Heritage Informatics Meeting Proceeding, 
                  
         (
link
)
   
                  2007
               



               
Riichiro Mizoguchi
                   “Ontology Engineering Environments, ” 
                  Handbook on Ontologies, 
                  pp. 275-298
                  2004
                  Springer
               



               

         (
link
)
   
               




               
Nicolas Guarino
                   “Some organizing principles for a unified top-level
                     ontology, ” 
                  Working Notes of AAAI Spring Symposium on Ontological
                     Engineering, , Stanford, 1997


            
         

      