Paper: A Trip Around the World: Balancing Geographical Diversity in Academic
                    Research Teams

                    Siemens, Lynne, 
                    School of Public Administration, University of
                        Victoria, 
                    
siemensl@uvic.ca

                

                    Burr, Elisabeth, 
                    Institute of Romance Studies, University of Leipzig, 
                    
elisabeth.burr@uni-leipzig.de

                

                    Cunningham, Richard, 
                    Acadia Digital Culture Observatory, Acadia University, 
                    
richard.cunningham@acadiau.ca

                

                    Duff, Wendy, 
                    Faculty of Information, University of Toronto, 
                    
wendy.duff@utoronto.ca

                

                    Forest, Dominic, 
                    École de bibliothéconomie et des sciences de l'information,
                        Université de Montréal, 
                    
dominic.forest@umontreal.ca

                

                    Warwick, Claire, 
                    UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, Department of Information
                        Studies, University College London, 
                    
c.warwick@ucl.ac.uk

                
Introduction

                
Interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary projects are becoming an important part
                    of academic life. Research questions are becoming more complex and
                    sophisticated, requiring a team approach to address (Newell et al., 2000, Hara
                    et al., 2003). At the same time, funding agencies are also encouraging these
                    types of projects through their granting programs. One result of this increased
                    level of research collaboration is that teams have members located at other
                    institutions, whether nationally or internationally. Digital Humanities as a
                    community is becoming increasingly international in focus. For example, the
                    Digging into Data Challenge was jointly sponsored by Canada’s Social Sciences
                    and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC), the British Joint Information Systems
                    Committee (JISC) and the American National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH)
                    and National Science Foundation (NSF) and required each research team to have
                    membership from at least two of the participating countries (Office of Digital
                    Humanities, 2010). Further, the Digital Humanities Summer Institute at the
                    University of Victoria has had participants from every continent, except the
                    Antarctic. Finally, the Text Encoding Initiative Consortium has members and
                    users from around the world, with a growing number of projects based in Asia
                    (Siemens, 2008c). These collaborations are possible given the advances in
                    computers and telecommunications. The recruitment of the right person is no
                    longer limited by geography (Cramton et al., 2005).

                
However, these types of teams encounter the general challenges associated with
                    collaborative work, but also with more specific ones relating to the
                    geographical distribution of members. Despite this increasing use of research
                    teams, protocols to prepare individual researchers to work as part of a team,
                    particularly within those groups which cross language, culture, and country
                    lines, are not widely developed. Our work is designed to identify effective work
                    patterns and intra-team relationships and describe the support and research
                    preparation that is required to develop international research collaborations.
                    The results will enable those who work in such teams to recognize those factors
                    that tend to predispose them to success, and perhaps more importantly, to avoid
                    those that may lead to problematic interactions, and thus make the project less
                    successful than it might have otherwise been.

            
            
                
Context

                
While there is a growing knowledge base of the benefits and challenges inherent
                    in academic research teams (See, for example: Bracken et al., 2006, Choi et al.,
                    2007, Fiore, 2008, Kraut et al., 1987), little knowledge exists about the ways
                    in which teams with memberships across universities and disciplines work
                    together (Garland et al., 2006), much less about teams with members from
                    multiple country, culture and language groups (Setlock et al., 2004, Shore et
                    al., 2005).

                
At a practical level, geography presents relatively simple challenges. As time
                    zones increase, the flexibility in scheduling meetings decreases while the cost
                    of face-to-face interactions increases. Technology may not always be capable of
                    overcoming these challenges. Distance between team members limits the amount of
                    interaction needed for creativity and innovation (Cummings et al., 2005,
                    Lawrence, 2006). Further, some technologies and software may not be available in
                    some countries due to infrastructure gaps or government policy (for example, the
                    Great Firewall of China).

                
At a more complex level, differences in culture and language may impact on
                    various aspects of team work such as structure, management, communication,
                    conflict expression and resolution, decision making, and appropriate team
                    behaviour and may be further complicated by professional and academic cultural
                    differences (Dafoulas, 2002, Setlock et al., 2004, Shachaf et al., 2007, Fry et
                    al., 2007, Lee-Kelley et al., 2008, Dekker et al., 2008). At a very basic level,
                    teams must decide a working language, a decision that may be political in nature
                    (Butler, 1998, Deepwell et al., 2009, Bournois et al., 1998). And even with a
                    common language, members may find that they must still translate terms. For
                    example, institutions in different countries define a research assistant (RA) in
                    a variety of ways. In Canada, an RA is generally a graduate student who works on
                    a research project on a part-time basis while in the United Kingdom, an RA is a
                    post-doctoral fellow who is on a full-time contract for a specified period of
                    time. As a result, confusion can occur among team members when they use common
                    terms in different ways.

                
Research suggests several factors that may minimize the impact of the above
                    challenges. First, education and training may mitigate the impact of cultural
                    differences because team members may share professional norms. University
                    education is fairly similar across countries (Dafoulas, 2002, Lee-Kelley et al.,
                    2008, Nason et al., 1998). Teams may also find it beneficial to spend time in
                    members’ cultures to create understanding of differences and similarities (Nason
                    et al., 1998, Bagshaw et al., 2007). Finally, teams may also consider creating a
                    cultural profile, both by country and professional/discipline culture (Dafoulas,
                    2002, Zakaria et al., 2008). This profile can be combined with team norms to
                    express understandings of time, deadlines, language, communication channels,
                    conflict resolution mechanisms, and other issues (Saunders et al., 2004).
                    However, more research is needed to understand the supports and research
                    preparation that is needed to ensure effective collaborations in teams with
                    memberships from many countries, cultures, and language groups.

            
            
                
Methodology

                
This paper is part of a larger project examining research teams with
                    multi-country, culture and language representation, led by a team based in
                    Canada, United Kingdom and Germany (For more details, see Siemens, 2010). The
                    larger study uses a combination of data collection methods including an
                    ethnomethodological approach with diary/log studies of research teams in the
                    midst of their collaboration (Garfinkel, 1984) and semi-structured interviews
                    with individuals who have experiences in the types of teams under investigation
                    (Marshall et al., 1999). This paper will report on the findings from the
                    interviews.

                
Digital Humanities community will serve as an exemplar case study population
                    given the community’s international focus and collaborative networks. To achieve
                    their objectives, and because of the variety of skills and expertise that these
                    projects require, DH researchers must work collaboratively both within their
                    institutions and with others nationally and internationally and often across
                    disciplines. Team members include humanities, social science and computer
                    science scholars, undergraduate and graduate students, research assistants,
                    computer programmers and developers, librarians, and others. At present, several
                    research projects involving national and international teams with funding
                    ranging from thousands to millions of dollars are already in place with others
                    in development. In addition, several DH research centres have faculty and
                    research staff drawn from several countries, creating a mix of languages and
                    cultures.

                
This research project builds on earlier work on DH research teams presented at
                    previous digital humanities conferences (Siemens, 2008a, Siemens, 2008b, Siemens
                    et al., 2009a, Siemens et al., 2010).

            
            
                
Preliminary Findings

                
At the time of writing this proposal, interviews are being conducted and data
                    analysis completed.

                
The benefits to the Digital Humanities community will be several. First, the
                    study contributes to an explicit description of the community’s work patterns
                    and relationships, particularly as the Digital Humanities community continues to
                    become international in focus (Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations,
                    2010, Tei-C, 2010). This research demonstrates that much of digital humanities
                    research is accomplished within interdisciplinary research teams, which are
                    developing tools and processes to facilitate this collaboration. One particular
                    issue highlighted in this research relates to challenges experienced within
                    teams with members from various countries and cultures (Siemens et al., 2009b).
                    Second, it is designed to enable those who work in such teams to recognise
                    factors that tend to predispose them to success, and perhaps more importantly,
                    to avoid those that may lead to problematic interactions, and thus make the
                    project less successful than it might otherwise have been.

            
        
References:

            
                
                    
Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (2010).
                            About., 
                        accessed September 26, 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Bagshaw, D., Lepp, M. & Zorn, C. R.
                        2007
                         “International Research Collaboration: Building Teams and
                            Managing Conflicts., ” 
                        Conflict Resolution Quarterly, 
                        Vol 24, No 4
                        433-446

                    
Bournois, F. & Chevalier, F.
                        1998
                         “Doing research with foreign colleagues: a project-life
                            cycle approach., ” 
                        Journal of Managerial Psychology, 
                        Vol 13, No 3/4
                        206-213

                    
Bracken, L. J. & Oughton, E. A.
                        2006
                         “'What do you mean?' The importance of language in
                            developing interdisciplinary research., ” 
                        Transactions of the Institute of British
                            Geographers, 
                        Vol 31, No 3
                        371-382

                    
Butler, M. C.
                        1998
                         “An integrating perspective on interdisciplinary,
                            cross-cultural research., ” 
                        Journal of Managerial Psychology, 
                        Vol 13, No 3/4
                        199-205

                    
Choi, B. C. K. & Pak, A. W. P.
                        2007
                         “Multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity, and
                            transdisciplinarity in health research, services, education and policy:
                            2. Promotors, barriers, and strategies of enhancement., ” 
                        Clinical & Investigative Medicine, 
                        Vol 30, No
                        E224-E232

                    
Cramton, C. D. & Webber, S. S. 
                        2005 
                         “Relationships among Geographic
                        Dispersion, Team Processes, and Effectiveness in Software Development Work
                        Teams., ”  
                        Journal of Business Research, 
                        Vol 58, No 6
                        758-765

                    
Cummings, J. N. & Kiesler, S. 
                        2005 
                         “Collaborative Research Across
                        Disciplinary and Organizational Boundaries., ”  
                        Social Studies of Science, 
                        Vol
                        35, No 5
                        703-722

                    
Dafoulas, G. 
                        2002 
                         “Investigating Cultural Differences in Virtual
                        Software Teams., ”  
                        Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing
                        Countries, 
                        Vol 7, No
                        1-14

                    
Deepwell, F. & King, V. 
                        2009 
                         “E-Research Collaboration, Conflict and
                        Compromise., ”  
                        Handbook of Research on
                        Electronic Collaboration and Organizational Synergy, 
                        Salmons, J. & Wilson, L.
                        IGI Global
                        Hershey, Pennsylvania

                    
Dekker, D. M., Rutte, C. G. & Van Den Berg, P. T. 
                        2008 
                         “Cultural
                        differences in the perception of critical interaction behaviors in global
                        virtual teams., ”  
                        International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 
                        Vol 32, No 5
                        441-452

                    
Fiore, S. M.
                        2008 
                         “Interdisciplinarity as Teamwork: How the Science of
                        Teams can Inform Team Science., ”  Small Group Research, 
                        Vol 39, No 3
                        251-277

                    
Fry, J. & Talja, S. 
                        2007 
                         “The intellectual and social organization
                        of academic fields and the shaping of digital resources., ”  
                        Journal of Information Science, 
                        Vol 33, No 2
                        115-133

                    
Garfinkel, H. 
                        1984 
                        Studies in Ethnomethodology, 
                        Polity Press/Blackwell Publishing
                        Malden, MA

                    
Garland, D. R., O'connor, M. K., Wolfer, T. A., et al. 
                        2006 
                         “Team-based Research: Notes from the Field., ”  
                        Qualitative Social Work, 
                        Vol 5, No 1
                        93-109

                    
Hara, N., Solomon, P., Kim, S.-L., et al. 
                        2003 
                         “An Emerging View of Scientific Collaboration: Scientists' Perspectives on Collaboration and
                        Factors that Impact Collaboration., ”  
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
                        Vol 54, No 10
                        952-965

                    
Kraut, R. E., Galegher, J. & Egido, C. 
                        1987 
                         “Relationships and Tasks in Scientific Research Collaboration., ”  
                        Human-Computer Interaction, 
                        Vol 3, No 1
                        31-58

                    
Lawrence, K. A. 
                        2006 
                         “Walking the Tightrope: The Balancing Acts of a Large e-Research Project., ”  
                        Computer Supported Cooperative Work: The Journal of Collaborative Computing, 
                        Vol 15, No 4
                        385-411

                    
Lee-Kelley, L. & Sankey, T. 
                        2008 
                         “Global virtual teams for value creation and project success: A case study., ”  
                        International Journal of Project Management, 
                        Vol 26, No 1
                        51-62

                    
Marshall, C. & Rossman, G. B. 
                        1999 
                        Designing Qualitative Research, 
                        SAGE Publications
                        Thousand Oaks, CA

                    
Nason, S. W. & Pillutla, M. M. 
                        1998 
                         “Towards a Model of International Research Teams., ”  
                        Journal of Managerial Psychology, 
                        Vol 13, No 3/4
                        156-166

                    
Newell, S. & Swan, J. 
                        2000
                         “Trust and Inter-organizational Networking., ”  
                        Human Relations, 
                        Vol 53, No 10
                        1287-1328

                    
Office of Digital Humanities 
                        2010 
                        Digging into Data Challenge., 
                        accessed September 26 2010
                        
         (
link
)
    

                    
Saunders, C., Van Slyke, C. & Vogel, D. R. 
                        2004 
                         “My time or yours? Managing time visions in global virtual teams., ”  
                        Academy of Management Executive, 
                        Vol 18, No 1
                        19-31

                    
Setlock, L. D., Fussell, S. R. & Neuwirth, C. 
                        2004 
                         “Taking it out of context: collaborating within and across cultures in face-to-face settings
                        and via instant messaging., ”  
                        Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work,  
                        Chicago, IL, 

                    
Shachaf, P. & Hara, N. 
                        2007 
                         “Behavioral complexity theory of media selection: a proposed theory for global virtual teams., ”  
                        Journal of Information Science, 
                        Vol 33, No 1
                        63-75

                    
Shore, B. & Cross, B. J. 
                        2005 
                         “Exploring the role of national culture in the management of large-scale international science projects., ” 
                        International Journal of Project Management, 
                        Vol 23, No 1
                        55-64

                    
Siemens, L. 
                        2008 
                         “The Balance between On-line and In-person Interactions: Methods for the Development of Digital Humanities Collaboration., ”  
                        SDH-SEMI 2008, 
                        Vancouver, BC, 

                    
Siemens, L. 
                        2008 
                         “"It’s a team if you use ‘reply all’”: An Exploration of Research Teams in Digital Humanities Environments., ”  
                        Digital Humanities 2008,  
                        Oulu, Finland, 

                    
Siemens, L. 
                        2008 
                         “Understanding the TEI-C Community: A Study in Breadth and Depth, Toward Membership and Recruitment., ”  
                        TEI Annual Conference, 
                        London, UK, 

                    
Siemens, L. 
                        2010 
                         “Understanding Academic Research Teams: Implications of Multi-Country, Multi-Language, and Multi-Culture Team Membership., ”  
                        European Summer School, 
                        Leipzig, Germany, 

                    
Siemens, L., Cunningham, R., Duff, W., et al. 
                        2009 
                         ““More minds are brought to bear on a problem”: Methods of Interaction and Collaboration within Digital Humanities Research Teams., ”  
                        Society for Digital Humanities/Société pour l'étude des médias interactifs, 
                        Ottawa, Ontario, 

                    
Siemens, L., Cunningham, R., Duff, W., et al. 
                        2010 
                         “A Tale of Two Cities: Implications of the Similarities and Differences in Collaborative Approaches within the Digital Libraries and Digital Humanities Communities., ” 
                        Digital Humanities 2010, 
                        London, UK, 

                    
Siemens, L., Duff, W., Warwick, C., et al. 
                        2009 
                         ““It challenges members to think of their work through another kind of specialist's eyes”: Exploration of the Benefits and Challenges of Diversity in Digital Project Teams. Thriving on Diversity - Information Opportunities in a Pluralistic
                        World, ”  
                        ASIS&T 2009 Annual Meeting,  
                        Vancouver, British Columbia, 

                    
Tei-C 
                        2010 
                        Current TEI Members., 
                        accessed October 12, 2010
                        
         (
link
)
   

                    
Zakaria, N., Amelinckx, A. & Wilemon, D. 
                        2008 
                         “Navigating Across Culture and Distance: Understanding the Determinants of Global Virtual Team Performance., ”  
                        Work Group Learning: Understanding, Improving & Assessing How Groups Learn in Organizations, 
                        Sessa, V. I. & London, M.
                        Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
                        New York, NY

                    
                
            
        