Poster: The Tesserae Project: Intertextual Analysis of Latin Poetry

					Coffee, Neil, 
					University at Buffalo, SUNY, 
					
ncoffee@buffalo.edu

				

					Koenig, J.-P., 
					University at Buffalo, SUNY, 
					
jpkoenig@buffalo.edu

				

					Poornim, Shakthi, 
					University at Buffalo, SUNY, 
					
poornima@buffalo.edu

				

					Forstall, Christopher, 
					University at Buffalo, SUNY, 
					
forstall@buffalo.edu

				

					Ossewaarde, Roelant, 
					University at Buffalo, SUNY, 
					
rao3@buffalo.edu

				

					Jacobson, Sarah, 
					University at Buffalo, SUNY, 
					

				
The Tesserae Project has created a freely available web tool for analyzing text
					reuse (intertextuality) that automatically identifies matching two-word phrases
					(bigrams) in Latin poets using one of two search algorithms. Comparison with the
					results of traditional scholarship demonstrates the efficacy, current
					limitations, and potential of this approach. Automatic bigram matching by
					morphological form and dictionary headword detects a significant number of
					parallels identified by traditional methods. Results so far do not fully
					replicate traditional scholarship, but the incorporation of further feature sets
					holds the potential of approaching this standard. Bigram detection produces more
					systematic results, permits large-scale intertextual study, and identifies less
					conspicuous parallels.

			

			
				
Computational Approaches to Intertextuality

				
The reuse of elements from other texts has been understood as a fundamental part
					of textual signification from ancient Alexandria to modern times. Traditional
					methods of identifying specific parallels have relied upon the scrutiny and
					memory of scholars (Hinds 1998, Edmunds 2001). Researchers have recently begun
					to employ computational means to facilitate and standardize intertextual study,
					as well as to open new perspectives. Two major lines of approach are phrase
					(n-gram) matching (e.g. Cummings 2009) and comparison of element length (Holmes
					2010). In the field of classical Greek and Latin literature, the Perseus Project
					has identified five computationally tractable features, including bigram
					matches, for assessing the similarity of phrases in different texts and has
					offered a method for cross-linguistic phrase matching (Bamman and Crane 2008,
					Bamman and Crane forthcoming). A program developed by the eAQUA project locates
					explicit quotations in the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae corpus of Greek texts
					(Büchler, Geßner et al. 2010).

			
			
				
Tesserae Search

				
The goals of the Tesserae Project are to create a website that facilitates
					intertextual search of classical Latin texts (
http://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu
) and to make computational methods
					and results accessible to traditional scholars. The Tesserae group chose bigram
					matching as the method most similar to the standard philological search for
					parallel phrases.


				
The tool finds similar phrases by matching two words in one text with two words
					in another. Users can choose two of 26 prepared texts for comparison using one
					of two search methods. Version 1 matches two identical words from each text, in
					any order, with no more than four words between them. Version 2 matches words
					anywhere in an individual sentence by dictionary headword using the Archimedes
					Project Morphology Service
					(http://archimedes.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/arch/archimedes.new.html), and employs an
					experimental ranking system to help the assessment of their potential
					significance. In both versions, the most common words are by default excluded to
					eliminate potentially insignificant matches. Users can modify search settings
					with an advanced tab.

			

			
				
Version 1 Test

				
A Version 1 test compared book 1 of Lucan’s 1st century CE epic Civil War with the whole of the 1st century BCE epic Aeneid by Vergil. The resulting 160 parallels were ranked for
					significance by traditional philological analysis on a 5 (most significant) to 1
					(error) scale. The ranked parallels were compared to those collated from a
					standard commentary on Lucan’s Civil War (Viansino 1995).
					Tesserae discovered 87 results judged significant (types 5-3) as compared with
					81 of Viansino. Tesserae and Viansino shared only 14 results in common. Tesserae
					returned results distributed more evenly through Civil
						War book 1 than Viansino, whose parallels clustered at the beginning
					and end of the book.

			

			
				
Version 2 Test

				
Version 2 eliminates errors from Version 1, matches by dictionary headword rather
					than exact form to account for inflection, and takes whole sentences rather than
					word windows as the unit of comparison. A Version 2 test again compared Civil War book 1 to the whole Aeneid, and the results were measured against the parallels given by
					all major Lucan commentators (Heitland and Haskins 1887, Thompson and Bruère
					1968, Viansino 1995, Roche 2009). The expanded search parameters of Version 2
					returned significantly more results than did Version 1: 2,994 vs. 160. Version 2
					produced numbers of types 5 and 4 comparable to Version 1, but considerably more
					type 3s, as in the following table, where the results of commentators have been
					collated and graded on the same scale for comparison.


			
			
				
Conclusions

				
Tesserae fulfills part of its purpose by quickly generating a convenient list of
					possible intertextual parallels for inspection. The combined tests further
					demonstrate that Version 1 and Version 2 deliver comparable numbers of the types
					of parallels scholars have traditionally valued, close morphological
					similarities of non-frequent words. These results are illustrated in the
					following chart.



				

						
Type 5 

						
Type 4 

						
Type 3 

						
Total Significant 

					 
Version 1 

						
19 

						
27 

						
41 

						
87 

					 
Version 2 

						
26 

						
43 

						
262 

						
331 

					 
Viansino 1995 

						
30 

						
17 

						
34 

						
81 

					 
Roche 2009 

						
85 

						
67 

						
170 

						
322 

					 
All commentators* 

						
96 

						
81 

						
195 

						
372 

					 
Parallels between Civil War 1 and Aeneid Found by Tesserae. Versions 1 and 2 Compared with
						Commentators

					
type 5: strong verbal similarity with
								meaningfully analogous context 

					 
type 4: moderate verbal similarity with
								meaningfully analogous context 

					 
type 3: verbal similarity without
								substantially analogous context 

					 
*All commentators: Heitland and Haskins 1887, Thompson and
							Bruère 1968, and Viansino 1995, Roche 2009. This counts the total number
							of unique parallels found, so the same parallel found by different
							commentators is counted only once. 

					 
Although Tesserae found meaningful parallels, it did not discover the majority of
					those found by the commentators. Most undetected matches had features that
					Tesserae does not currently recognize, including similarity of location,
					meaning, meter, and sound. The results that Tesserae did find, however, appeared
					in patterns resembling those found by commentators. For example, the
					commentators found fewer highly significant reference types in the second half
					of Civil War 1 (type 5, 63 vs. 33 in the second half;
					type 4, 41 vs. 40), and the combined Tesserae results show a similar, though
					steeper, decline (type 5, 29 vs. 8; type 4, 30 vs. 27). Tesserae thus supports
					the cumulative suggestion of the commentators that Lucan establishes
					substantially more highly significant parallels to the Aeneid in the first half of Civil War book 1
					than in the second.


				
Conversely, Tesserae detects more type 3 references in the first half of the poem
					than the second, whereas the commentators find the opposite (Tesserae: 158 vs.
					122; Commentators: 89 vs. 106). One possible explanation for this difference is
					that commentators overlook less significant parallels when there are more
					significant parallels in the same vicinity. On this interpretation, the larger
					number of significant parallels in the first half of the Civil
						War led to a correspondingly reduced detection of less significant
					parallels by commentators, whereas Tesserae detected all types more
					consistently. Tesserae search thus serves as a complement to and check on
					traditional analysis in this and other respects, as when in several instances
					Tesserae returned more links to a given phrase than were noted by
					commentators.


				
For longer texts, the proportion of insignificant to significant parallels
					presented is currently too high for Version 2 to be fully useful, as substantial
					time is required to sort and analyze the results. Future work will involve
					developing a system that replicates the manual scoring used for testing to more
					easily identify different types of parallels. Other planned improvements include
					the addition of new search parameters and texts, the addition of Greek and other
					languages, user uploaded texts, and the ability to perform a secondary search
					for found phrases across a corpus.

			
		
References:

			
				
					

						Bamman, D. and G. Crane
						2008
						 “The Logic and Discovery of Textual Allusion., ” 
						Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
							Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2008), 
						Marrakesh, 
					


					

						Bamman, D. and G. Crane
						Discovering Multilingual Text Reuse in Literary Texts
							[forthcoming], 
					


					

						Büchler, M., A. Geßner, et al.
						2010
						 “Unsupervised Detection and Visualization of Textual Reuse
							on Ancient Greek Texts, ” 
						Proceedings of the Chicago Colloquium on
							Digital Humanities and Computer Science 1, 
					


					

						Cummings, James
						4 September 2009
						 “TEI-Comparator, ” 
						In my <element/>., 
						
         (
link
)
   
					


					

						Edmunds, L.
						2001
						Intertextuality and the Reading of Roman Poetry, 
						Baltimore
						Johns Hopkins University Press
					


					

						Heitland, W. E. and C. E. Haskins
						1887
						M. Annaei Lucani Pharsalia, 
						London
						G. Bell
					


					

						Hinds, S.
						1998
						Allusion and Intertext: Dynamics of Appropriation in Roman
							Poetry., 
						Cambridge
						Cambridge University Press
					


					

						Holmes, M.
						2010
						 “Using the Universal Similarity Metric to Map
							Correspondences between Witnesses., ” 
						Digital Humanities 2010 Abstracts, 
						
         (
link
)
   
					


					

						Roche, P., Ed.
						2009
						Lucan: De bello civili. Book 1, 
						Oxford
						Oxford University Press
					

					

						Thompson, L. and R. T. Bruère
						1968
						 “Lucan’s Use of Vergilian Reminiscence, ” 
						Classical Philology, 
						63
						1-21
					

					

						Trillini, R. H. and S. Quassdorf
						2010
						 “A ‘Key to All Quotations’?: A Corpus-based Parameter Model
							of Intertextuality., ” 
						Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
						25
						269-86
					

					

						Viansino, G.
						1995
						Marco Annaeo Lucano: La Guerra Civile (Farsaglia) libri
							I-V., 
						Milan
						Arnoldo Mondadori
					



				
			
		