Keynote: Re-Imagining Scholarship in the Digital Age

                    Gaffield, Chad, 
                
Abstract

                
Quite unexpectedly and often in surprising ways, Digital Humanities have been
                    playing a central role in the larger re-imagining of scholarship in the early
                    21st century. This re-imagining is transforming teaching, research and, indeed,
                    all aspects of academic life. Moreover, the established boundaries between, and
                    relationships among, scholarly activities on campus and in the larger society
                    are falling flat or being re-configured through networks, clusters and dynamic
                    forms of engagement. The result is exhilarating and un-nerving, inspiring and
                    challenging, energizing and exhausting, if judged by public debate on campus and
                    beyond about the changing post-secondary landscape. But if we focus on the
                    emergence and current trajectory of Digital Humanities, we can perceive with
                    cautious optimism the ways in which a re-imagined scholarship is beginning to
                    enhance learning, to help interpret the past and present, and to contribute to
                    meaningful life in the 21st century.

            
            
                
Bio

                
Gaffield is Professor of History at the University of Ottawa and currently on
                    leave while he serves as President of the Social Science and Humanities Research
                    Council of Canada. Founding Director of the Institute of Canadian Studies,
                    Gaffield has been since the 1970s at the forefront of computer-based analyses of
                    long-term social change. He has played a leading role in, and produced
                    award-winning publications from, database projects such as the Canadian Social
                    History Project, the Vancouver Island Project, the Lower Manhattan Project, and
                    the Canadian Families Project; as President of the Humanities and Social
                    Sciences Federation of Canada, he also championed the Data Liberation
                    Initiative. 

                
Among his many notable accomplishments, the prize is awarded to
                    Gaffield for his role as Principal Investigator for the Canadian Century
                    Research Infrastructure project (CCRI; www.ccri.uottawa.ca). CCRI has created a
                    foundation for the study of social, economic, cultural, and political change at
                    a national level, beginning with digital reconstruction of censuses that sit at
                    the core of a pan-national research database consisting of pertinent contextual
                    data drawn from newspapers, parliamentary proceedings, legislative records and
                    beyond.

            
        