DHArchive
dharchive
.org
 Print
 XML
<audio>Digital Humanities</audio>: The Intersections of Sound and Method

    
Category:
Panel

      
Session:
2

      
Date:
2014-07-09
Time:
11:00:00

      
Room:
410 - Amphimax

    

        
Clement
,
									
Tanya

        

          

        
School of Information, University of Texas at Austin

      

      

        
Kraus
,
									
Kari

        

          

        
College of Information Studies, University of Maryland, College Park

      

      

        
Sayers
,
									
Jentery

        

          

        
Maker Lab in the Humanities, University of Victoria

      

      

        
Trettien
,
									
Whitney

        

          

        
Soundbox, Franklin Humanities Institute, Duke University

      

      

        
Tcheng
,
									
David 

        

          

        
Illinois Informatics Institute at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

      

      

        
Auvil
,
									
Loretta

        

          

        
Illinois Informatics Institute at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

      

      

        
Borries
,
									
Tony

        

          

        
Illinois Informatics Institute at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

      

      

        
Wu
,
									
Min

        

          

        
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park

      

      

        
Oard
,
									
Doug

        

          

        
College of Information Studies, University of Maryland, College Park

      

      

        
Hajj-Ahmad
,
									
Adi

        

          

        
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park

      

      

        
Su
,
									
Hui

        

          

        
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park

      

      

        
Lingold
,
									
 Mary Caton

        

          

        
Soundbox, Franklin Humanities Institute, Duke University

      

      

        
Mueller
,
									
Daren

        

          

        
Soundbox, Franklin Humanities Institute, Duke University

      

      

        
Turkel
,
									
William J.

        

          

        
The Lab for Humanistic Fabrication, Western University

      

      

        
Elliott
,
									
Devon

        

          

        
Western University 

      

    
A wide range of
interdisciplinary scholarship on sound has sparked investigations into the
cultural histories of aurality and sound reproduction, the politics of the
voice and noise, urban soundscapes, ethnographic modernities, acoustemologies,
and the sonic construction of gender, race, and ethnicity.[i] These important
qualitative studies, moreover, have in recent years been supplemented by
large-scale quantitative analyses of speech and music datasets, several of
which have been underwritten by the International Digging into Data Challenge,
including the “Structural Analysis of Large Amounts of Music” (SALAMI) and the “Mining
a Year of Speech” projects. Yet a lingering textual bias within digital
humanities – largely a product of the field’s emergence from textual and
literary studies – has obscured the significance of this work for the field,
often preventing meaningful overlap. Copyright restrictions, the difficulties
of archiving audio formats, and the general lack of tools for researching and
writing in audio have contributed to the difficulty of working with sound in
digital projects. Aside from the occasional use of CD appendixes or
supplementary websites, for example, many studies have not taken full advantage
of the affordances of digital media to produce scholarship that integrates
audio content into scholarly argumentation. It is against this backdrop that
leading sound theorist Jonathan Sterne has argued that “existing digital
humanities work has largely reproduced visualist biases in the humanities”
(2011).

  
By identifying and highlighting
four research initiatives clustered around audio artifacts, this panel aims to
bring sound scholarship and digital humanities into a more meaningful
conversation with each other. As these projects demonstrate, sound is
materially constituted, containing invisible environmental fingerprints or
leaving physical traces in artifacts; and, further, is performative and
temporally mediated. Thus to access and analyze sound requires not only a new
approach to “tool making” within digital humanities, but a deeper engagement
with media studies, archival science, and creative forms of scholarship more
generally. As Trettien and Lingold’s Soundbox initiative shows, the
methodological vibrancy of the field is also predicated on innovation and
reform of our critical infrastructures, including the development of
publication environments that can take advantage of the cross-medial character
of much sound research. Elliott’s kits for cultural history, for example, allow
users to experience the past through multiple sensory channels, including
sight, sound, and touch; and Clement and Kraus’s work incorporates extensive
spectrographic analysis. Thus a larger aim of the panel is to draw attention to
the richly synaesthetic nature of digital sound studies.

  
Access and Analysis, Tanya Clement (15 minutes)

  
There are few analysis tools
available for humanists interested in accessing and analyzing audio archives
that comprise significant artifacts of bygone oral traditions represented in
storytelling, speeches, oral histories, and poetry performances. In response to
this lack, the iSchool at UT-Austin and the Illinois Informatics Institute (I3)
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) hosted a year-long
NEH-funded Institute for Advanced Topics in the Humanities called High
Performance Sound Technologies for Analysis and Scholarship (HiPSTAS). HiPSTAS
included twenty humanities junior and senior faculty and advanced graduate
students as well as librarians and archivists interested in analyzing large
audio collections. As this speaker will address, HiPSTAS has yielded
significant results for audio big data analysis in the humanities including an
implementation of the ARLO (Adaptive Recognition with Layered Optimization)
software, a machine learning application for analyzing sound on Stampede, an
NSF petascale HPC system at the Texas Advanced Computing Center. Originally
developed to classify and analyze bird calls by extracting audio features and
displaying the audio data as a spectral graph (Downie et al. 2008, Punyasena et al.
2012), ARLO has also been used by humanists as part of HiPSTAS to extract basic
prosodic features such as pitch, rhythm and timbre for matching, discovery
(clustering) and automated classification (prediction or supervised learning) (Figure 1). This talk will discuss how significant sonic patterns of interest to
humanists are discoverable using ARLO with the PennSound poetry archive and the
University of Texas Folklore Center Archives, among other collections.

  

    
Fig. 1: This spectrogram, created in ARLO, shows Gertrude Stein reading “Some such thing” from her novel The Making of Americans; each row of pixels is a frequency band presented across an X-access of time.

    

  
Media Archaeology, Devon Elliott (15 minutes)

  
Recent research in media
archaeology (Fuller 2005, Gitelman 2006, Kirschenbaum 2008) underscores why the
material particulars of technology matter where questions of culture are
concerned. This research is frequently anchored in archival documents—including
lab notebooks, patents, and engineering journals—that correspond with
technological experiments. Building on this research, this talk shares initial
findings from the “Kits for Cultural History” project, a collaboration between
the Maker Lab in the Humanities (UVic), the Lab for Humanistic Fabrication
(Western), and several memory institutions across Canada. The project involves
making physical kits that encourage scholars to reconstruct historical
experiments through the use of schematics, facsimiles, and rich media. Audio is
central to a number of these kits, especially kits that focus on sound
reproduction. Not only does it add another modality to research that is usually
text-based or visual in character. It also emphasizes how any media history is
a history of the senses: a history of how embodied behaviors like listening
relate recursively with technological developments. With audio in mind, the
talk argues for the relevance of experimental reconstruction to digital
humanities, highlighting the importance of: 1) old technologies to contemporary
computing practices, 2) multimodal learning and applied methods to media
history, 3) integrating museum collections into these methods, and 4) understanding
sound as necessarily material, subject to techniques commonly found in, say,
textual studies. These four points draw together domains all too often parsed:
visual and sonic paradigms, critical thinking and critical making, media
archaeology and digital humanities. 

  
Signal and Noise, Kari Kraus (15 minutes)

  
Twentieth-century recorded
sound, like the first electric power system, originated in Thomas Edison’s
Menlo Park laboratory shortly before the turn of the century (Hughes, Morton).
In the decades that followed, sound technology and power transmission would
continue to develop in tandem.  In this
presentation we introduce an unexpectedly useful consequence of the historic
entanglement of sound and electricity: the ability to code our past for time

and place. A new collaboration at the University of Maryland aims to recover
the date and time on which an historic recording was made based on analysis of
incidentally captured traces of small variations in the electric power supply
at the time of recording (Oard, et al; Su, et al). Although the field of audio
forensics has used such Electric Network Frequency signatures to authenticate
contemporary recordings for over a decade, our project seeks to extend the
period for which baselines are available a further half century into the past.
We do this by assembling recordings that were made at known times and comparing
their ENF signatures with the signatures in recordings for which we lack such
provenance information. 

  
After summarizing the results
of our initial experiments, we focus on implications for archival practice,
including retention of the original ENF signal across media formats (Figure 1
)
, and conclude on a theoretical note: because ENF is
traditionally dismissed as electronic noise by audio engineers and regarded as
non-semantic in character, it poses an interesting challenge to the
well-established archival concept of “significant properties.”

  

    
Fig. 2: Analog recordings that have undergone digital conversion and reformatting will often contain two or more ENF signatures: an original and a recaptured signature. The spectrogram in the image on the left shows the ENF trace from a 1962 magnetic tape recording of an oval office meeting during the Kennedy administration and a separate ENF trace embedded at the time of digitization. In the figure on the right, two signatures overlap. We have developed preliminary techniques for distinguishing these multiple traces.

    

  
Publication and performance, Whitney Trettien and Mary Caton Lingold (15
minutes)

  
Soundbox
is a collaborative exercise in producing and publishing sonic scholarship. Its
main research output is an edited digital collection bringing together a
vanguard of emerging scholars and critical artists engaging in sonic
scholarship, from exhibits and installations to digital essays, soundscapes,
and speculative digital tools.

  
While
the original goal of the project was to show, through example, the wide range
of possibilities for an amplified digital humanities, the impossibility of publishing this work through standard scholarly
venues – that is, those that facilitate the forms of peer review required for
advancement in the profession – has become clear as the project proceeds.
Because of concerns over long-term maintenance of digital scholarship,
database-driven platforms like Omeka, Scalar, and Wordpress are quickly
becoming the standard publishing format for digital work. Designed around
arguments written in text and image, though, these platforms are largely
inadequate to scholarship that integrates sound beyond the occasional linked
audio clip. Thus the potential for amplified scholarly production opened up by,
for instance, creative, small-scale, targeted uses of the HTML5 audio tag
remains largely unrealizable within an increasingly calcified digital
publishing infrastructure – a fact with ongoing
consequences for what “counts” as digital humanities scholarship.

  
Using
Soundbox’s experience as a case study, the speakers address the structural
biases that continue to silence digital humanities. We argue for balancing the
need for long-term maintenance and accessibility with a pluralistic approach
that does not foreclose the possibilities of new forms and formats.

  
References

  
Attali, Jacques
 (1985). Noise: The Political Economy of Music. 
            Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

  
Cavarero, Adriana
 (2005).For More Than One Voice: Toward a Philosophy of Vocal Expression.  Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press. Print.

  
Dolar, Mladen
 (2006). A
            Voice and Nothing More. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

  
Downie, J. S. , Tcheng,
            David K., and Xiang, Xin
 (2008). “Novel
              interface services for bioacoustic digital libraries” in Proc. 8th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conf. on Digital Libraries. New York: ACM,
            2008: 423-423.

  
Fuller, Matthew.
 (2005). Media
            Ecologies: Materialist Energies in Art and Technoculture. Cambridge, Mass:
            MIT Press.  

  
Gitelman, Lisa.
 (2005) Always
            Already New: Media, History, and the Data of Culture. Cambridge, Mass: MIT
            Press.  

  
Hirschkind, Charles.
 (2006) The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic Counterpublics.  New York: Columbia University Press.

  

    High Performance Sound Technologies for Access and
              Scholarship project
    
blogs.ischool.utexas.edu/hipstas/

  

  
Hughes, Thomas Parke.
 (1983) Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880-1930.
            Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Print.

  
Josephson, Matthew
 (1992). Edison: A Biography. New York: J. Wiley. Print.

  
Kirschenbaum, Matthew
 (2008). Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination. Cambridge,
            Mass: MIT Press.  

  
LaBelle, Brandon
 (2010). Acoustic
            Territories: Sound Culture and Everyday Life.  New York: Continuum.

  
Meintjes, Louise
 (2003. Sound
            of Africa!: Making Music Zulu in a South African Studio. Durham: Duke
            University Press.

  
Morton, David.
 (2004). Sound
            Recording: The Life Story of a Technology. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. Print.

  
Moten, Fred
 (2003). In
            the Break: The Aesthetics of the Black Radical Tradition.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

  
Oard, D., M. Wu, K. Kraus, A. Hajj-Ahmad, H. Su, R.
            Garg
 (2014). “It’s about Time: Projecting Temporal Metadata for Historically
              Significant Recordings.” Forthcoming, Proceedings
            of the 2014 iConference. Berlin, Germany. 4-7 March 2014. ACM Digital
            Library. Web.

  
Ochoa, Ana Maíra
  (2006). “Sonic Transculturation,
            Epistemologies of Purification and the Aural Public Sphere in Latin America.” Social Identities 12.6: 803-25.

  
Punyasena, Surangi W., Tcheng, David K., Wesseln, Cassandra,
            Mueller, Pietra G
 (2012). “Classifying black and white spruce pollen using layered
              machine learning.”New Phytologist
            196.3: 937-944.

  
Rodgers, Tara
 (2010).Pink Noises: Women on Electronic Music and Sound.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

  
Smith, Mark M
 (2006). How
            Race Is Made: Slavery, Segregation, and the Senses.  Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
            Press. Print

  
Smith, Mark M
 (2001). Listening
            to Nineteenth-Century America. 
            Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. Print.

  
Sterne, Jonathan
. The
            Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound Reproduction.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003.

  
Sterne, Jonathan.
 (2011) “Audio in Digital Humanities Authorship: A
            Roadmap.” (essay in progress) Super
            bon! Online:
superbon.net/?p=1915
. Accessed June 7, 2013.

  
Sterne, Jonathan
 (2012). MP3: The
            Meaning of a Format.  Durham: Duke
            University Press.

  
Su, H., Garg, R., Hajj-Ahmad, A., Min Wu
 (2013). “ENF
            Analysis on Recaptured Audio Recordings.” Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE
            International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
            Vancouver, BC, Canada. 26-31 May 2013. 3018-3022. Web.

  
Thompson, Emily Ann
 (2002). The Soundscape of Modernity: Architectural Acoustics and the Culture of
            Listening in America, 1900-1933. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press.

  
Toop, David
 (2010). Sinister
            Resonance: The Mediumship of the Listener. 
            New York: Continuum.

  
Weheliye, Alexander G
. (2005). Phonographies: Grooves in Sonic Afro-Modernity.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

  
For cultural histories of aurality, see entries for
            Smith 2001, 2006 in the bibliography; for sound reproduction, Sterne 2003,
            2012; for the politics of the voice, Cavarero 2005, Dolar 2006; and noise,
            Attali 1984; for urban soundscapes, see entries for Toop 2010, Thompson 2002,
            Labelle 2010; ethnographic modernities and acoustemologies are covered in
            Hershkind 2006 and Ochoa 2006. The sonic construction of gender receives
            treatment in Rodgers 2010 and Martin 1991; for race and ethnicity, see Weheliye
            2002, Moten 2003, Smith 2006, and Meintjes 2003.

