DHArchive
dharchive
.org
 Print
 XML
Visualizing Global News

    
Category:
Long Paper

      
Session:
7

      
Date:
2014-07-11
Time:
11:00:00

      
Room:
319 - Amphipôle

    

        
Losh
,
									
Elizabeth

        

          

        
University of California, San Diego, United States of America

      

      

        
Manovich
,
									
Lev

        

          

        
CUNY Graduate Center, New York, United States of America

      

    

  

  

    
Fig. 1: Elizabeth Losh and members of Software Studies Initiative explore media visualization of 113
￼video public addresses by U.S. President Barack Obama. Visualizations are available at
http://lab.softwarestudies.com/2011/09/digging-into-global-news.html


    

  
Television news often serves as the first, most vivid draft of history and shapes
the conventions of political speech and civic participation around the world, but
undertaking systematic analysis of large digitized corpora of broadcast news video
archives and even smaller corpora of government information videos in the public record
presents a number of technical, methodological, and institutional challenges. Although a
deeper understanding of how the news is represented in moving images promises to
improve access to historical records, participation in public dialogue, and education at all
levels, large corpora of video news programs are considerably more difficult to catalog,
mine, and visualize than text news collections. Furthermore, new forms of dissemination,
annotation, and commentary made possible by the Internet are rapidly transforming
video news consumption on a global scale. At the same time, traditional newspapers of
record are incorporating more multimedia content, so new computational methods such
as video search will become increasingly necessary for researchers working with all
news collections. By collaborating with archivists and computer scientists, it is possible
to analyze visual rhetoric in very large video collections using media visualization


  
“Visualizing Global News” studies how excerpts from large collections of political
speech videos with historically significant personages are remixed into even larger
collections of news broadcasts. It applies new techniques in search and visualization to
aid both humanities researchers and the greater public interested in exploring the visual
details, aesthetic features, and narrative context of source footage that is reused in news
broadcasts. The project focuses on materials from four political figures who appear in
video news from 2001 to 2011 and tags and visualizes a rich set of intersecting corpora:
newscasts from the US program Democracy Now!, the Qatar news channel Al Jazeera
English, the top-rated Dutch news show NOS Journaal. This video corpus contains over
30,000 separate news programs, and over 2,000 videos of political speeches.


  
As participants in the Digital Media Analysis, Search and Management (DMASM)
international workshops, we are well aware of the technical problems plaguing automatic
systems and that even distinguishing foreground objects from backgrounds can be
challenging. Nonetheless, the MediaMill technology has performed well in the yearly
TRECVID benchmark competition, and ImagePlot can create compelling visualizations
working with key frames. Our presentation aims to provide a policy overview of the
opportunities and challenges of DH with global video news archives. Currently the “big
data” problem of identifying heterogeneous sources in moving image archives has been
largely funded by corporations interested in protecting intellectual property and state
entities interested in surveillance. Without digital humanities scholars playing a larger
role and generating research questions that merit publication, the most vivid aspects of
the historical record are likely to remain under-theorized and analyzed without large-
scale comparative study across nations and periods. 

  

    

  
Visual rhetoric has a long tradition in the humanities that includes analysis of
symbolic objects in portraits of world leaders or the choreography of their oratorical
performances. However, contemporary news broadcasts present historical figures in the
public record in increasingly visually complex ways that use massive collections of
heterogeneous and frequently unsourced footage, motion graphics, and digital effects.

  
In this project we use new computational and visualization techniques to foster new
forms of humanities scholarship and public access to historical records. Political figures
produce memoirs, letters, editorials, and other forms of written discourse, but the
speeches they compose are also performed and thus can be analyzed as much more
than written texts. Now that the speeches of contemporary political leaders are recorded
and archived, humanists have a rich record of public rhetoric to analyze that includes
facial expression, bodily gesture, vocal performance, and frequently the use of sets and
props. In the era of digital video new editing and compositing techniques are also part of
the “official version” of a given speech, and portions of these speeches may be further
edited and composited when they appear as part of news broadcasts. Broadcasters
may adopt (or reject) signature visual styles that brand their programs and even signal
their political orientation, and these markers of visual rhetoric can be mapped over time
or represented comparatively (Manovich, 2011b). Scholars in the fields of rhetoric,
performance studies, history, journalism, film and media studies, and civic education can
compare and contrast visual and verbal political messages and changes over time in
large video collections.


  
While a transcript of a given speech may give humanities scholars information
about word use and specific references to people, places, and events, much of the
rhetoric of the news is actually nonverbal. For example, the use of slow motion, freeze
frame, or replay techniques may change the meaning of a given rhetorical moment.
Visual arguments in news programs are now often advanced by compelling editing,
dazzling information graphics, or aesthetic choices that privilege aspects such as warm
lighting or patriotic color schemes. At the same time, the size of digital collections of
video news is growing rapidly in response to a number of trends: 1) cable television and
satellite television, which spawned the twenty-four-hour news cycle, have become
international phenomena, 2) television stations now create web-only content to draw
Internet viewers to their programs online, 3) newspapers are incorporating multimedia
content and interactive features in archives that once only indexed print news, and 4)
bloggers and vloggers involved in citizen journalism have participated in a dramatic
expansion of the scope and scale of independent media.

  
The difficulty of humanities news analysis is exacerbated by the fact that a typical
television news program is actually “database cinema” (Manovich 2005) composed of
many different kinds of source footage, including studio shots of anchors, field reporting,
tock footage, video news releases, government public relations materials, and witness
journalism from cell phones and mobile devices. Source clips may not be attributed
much less tagged with date, location, individuals shown, or person/organization behind
the camera (Losh 2008, Gregory 2010), and the meaning of objects or gestures in the
frame, as evidence of the intention or motivation of particular political actors, can be
controversial (Losh 2011).


  
The UCSD project team created visualizations with the official digital video
archive from the Obama administration at WhiteHouse.gov that focused on the collection
of “Weekly Addresses” directly addressing an imagined American Internet viewer that
includes extensive discussions about current events that range from repeated
occurrences (economic boosterism, holiday celebrations, etc.) to one-time disasters and
tragedies (the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, the shootings at Fort Hood, etc.). UCSD has
also examined a significant subset of videos in the WhiteHouse.gov archive that are
addressed to audiences abroad as part of U.S. public diplomacy campaigns, which are
sometimes also remixed into global news broadcasts. Even a country with a relatively
small population or one that is not usually considered critical to U.S. interests, such as
Côte d'Ivoire, may have a designated Obama direct address. This dataset allows those
studying the visual rhetoric of international relations to work with a particularly rich and
dense corpus that includes acknowledgement of cultural exchanges and national
holidays. For example, historians studying U.S. Iranian relations in the twenty first
century could look closely at three separate annual addresses recorded by Barack
Obama that were intended to go directly to the people of Iran on the occasion of Nowrūz,
the Persian new year. Each address is fundamentally different in tone and diction, as
the U.S.-Iranian diplomatic relationship seems to deteriorate, as well as in shot
composition and White House location.


  
Media created by a sitting U.S. president are always historically significant, but
media created by Barack Obama -- the first test case area in this project -- are especially
interesting to humanities researchers. In addition to scholarship done by rhetoricians,
historians, political scientists, and performance studies and communication scholars,
Barack Obama has also generated significant scholarly attention worldwide from those
who study American popular culture, race relations, religion, gender, class, civic
participation, digital culture, and globalization. The volume of scholarly publication of
peer-reviewed books and articles about Obama and the large number of conferences,
panels, and talks reflect the potential importance of this collection to scholarly discourse.


  
The Obama official video corpus has also been significant for the international
press, which often uses content from the weekly addresses and other WhiteHouse.gov
speeches and public statements in news broadcasts shown worldwide. Researchers at
UCSD have noted the presence of material from the official Obama corpus in global
broadcasts that include shows from the BBC, PressTV in Iran, Al Arabiya in the United
Arab Emirates, ABS-CBN in the Philippines, and many others. The expense of
maintaining news bureaus abroad is an obvious reason to rebroadcast free HD footage,
but stations often add their own visuals and editorial commentary. For example, the
Indian television network NDTV cropped official U.S. government footage from
“President Obama’s Statement on Credit Downgrade” and added its own corporate
branding along with a skeptical digital banner that read “Obama Assures But Dow
Plunges.” 

  

    
Fig. 3: UCSD visualization of White House government records footage of an Obama speech to the
Iranian people (top) and visualizations of how the same speech appears in Democracy Now!
(middle) and Al Jazeera English (bottom). To create these visualizations, the UCSD team first
used open source software to automatically detect shot boundaries in the video, and then applied
media visualization tools to create a grid of images where each image is the first frame of each
UCSD visualization of White House government records footage of an Obama speech to the
Iranian people (top) and visualizations of how the same speech appears in Democracy Now!
(middle) and Al Jazeera English (bottom). To create these visualizations, the UCSD team first
used open source software to automatically detect shot boundaries in the video, and then applied
media visualization tools to create a grid of images where each image is the first frame of each
shot.

    

  
Working with a large set of news archives from different sources will also allow
us to develop possible answers to a number of critical research questions for archivists:
How can we build systems that allow users to compare historical world events from
different national or political perspectives? How can we connect one nation’s collections
to the collections of others, and how will those connected collections benefit users?
Given the capabilities of new search tools, how can we best improve cataloging
processes, which currently depend on costly manual input, to make collections broadly
usable and accessible? How can we begin to trace the re-use and re-contextualization
of primary materials, in particular, news materials?

  

    
Fig. 4: President Obama's 2009 Nowruz address to the Iranian people as excerpted by the TV news program Democracy Now! Each frame represents one shot of the program. The frames are arranged in the order of shots (left to right, top to bottom). Shot 19 (third column, third row) is the excerpt from President Obama'a video address.

    

  

    
Fig. 5: President Obama's 2009 Nowruz address excerpted by Al Jazeera TV broadcast. Each frame represents a sequential shot of the program. Shots 5 and 6 (first row) are excerpts from President Obama's video address.

    

  
References

  
American Council of Learned Societies 
(2006). Our cultural commonwealth : The report
            of the American Council of Learned Societies Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for the
            Humanities and Social Sciences. New York, NY: American Council of Learned Societies.
          

  
Atkinson, Joshua 
(2010). Alternative media and politics of resistance: A communication
            perspective. New York, NY: Peter Lang.
          

  
Becker, Konrad
 (2009). Deep search:The politics of search beyond Google. Innsbruck;
            Piscataway, N.J. Studien Verlag.
          

  
Boler, Megan 
(2008). Digital media and democracy tactics in hard times. Cambridge,
            MA.: MIT Press.
          

  
Borgman, Christine L.
 (2010, May). The digital archive: The data deluge arrives in the
            humanities. Time Will Tell, But Epistemology Won't. In Memory of Richard Rorty.
            Presentation at A Celebration of Richard Rorty's Archive, University of California, Irvine.
          

  
Dayan, Daniel
 (1992). Media events: the live broadcasting of history. Cambridge, MA:
            Harvard University Press.
          

  
Douglass, Jeremy
 (2009, January). Computer visions of computer games: Analysis and
            visualization of play recordings. Workshop at Media Arts, Science, and Technology
            (MAST) 2009: The Future of Interactive Media. University of California, Santa Barbara.
          

  
Douglass, Jeremy, Huber, William & Manovich, Lev
 (2011). Understanding scanlation:
            How to read one million fan-translated manga pages. Image and Narrative. Brussels,
            Belgium.
          

  
Edelman, Murray 
(1988). Constructing the Political Spectacle. Chicago: University Of
            Chicago Press.
          

  
Entman, Robert 
(1989). Democracy without citizens: Media and the decay of American
            politics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
          

  
Etzioni, A. 
(1972). Minerva: An Electronic Town Hall. Policy Sciences, 3(4), 457-474.
          

  
Gregory, S. 
(2010). Cameras Everywhere: Ubiquitous Video Documentation of Human
            Rights, New Forms of Video Advocacy, and Considerations of Safety, Security, Dignity
            and Consent. Journal of Human Rights Practice, 2(2), 191-207.
            doi:10.1093/jhuman/huq002
          

  
Hill, C. A., & Helmers, M. H. 
(2004). Defining visual rhetorics. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
            Erlbaum.
          

  
Huurnink B. et al. 
(2010). Today's and tomorrow's retrieval practice in the audiovisual
            archive. Proceedings from CIVR '10: ACM International Conference on Image and
            Video Retrieval (pp.18-25). Xi'an, China.
          

  
Ito, Mizuko
 (2009). Hanging Out, Messing Around, and Geeking Out. Cambridge,
            MA: MIT Press.
          

  
Jamieson, Kathleen 
(1988). Eloquence in an Electronic Age: the Transformation of
            Political Speechmaking. New York: Oxford University Press.
          

  
Jarrett, Susan; Losh, Elizabeth & Puente, David 
(2006). Transnational identifications:
            Biliterate writers in a first-year humanities course. Journal of Second Language Writing
            15, 24-48.
          

  
Jenkins, Henry
 (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New
            York, NY: New York University Press.
          

  
Juhasz, Alexandra
 (2011). Learning from YouTube. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
          

  
Kumar, Belhumeur & Nayar 
(2008). FaceTracer: A Search Engine for Large Collections
            of Images with Faces. Proceedings from The European Conference on Computer Vision,
            340-353.
          

  
Lévy, Maurice & European Commission 
(2011). The New Renaissance. Brussels:
            European Commission.
          

  
Losh, Elizabeth
 (2008). Government YouTube: Bureaucracy, surveillance, and legalism
            in state sanctioned online video channels. In Geert Lovink & Sabine Niederer (Eds.),
            Video vortex reader (pp. 111-124). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Institute of Network
            Cultures.
          

  
Losh, Elizabeth
 (2009). Virtualpolitik: An electronic history of government media-making
            in a time of war, scandal, disaster, miscommunication, and mistakes. Cambridge, MA:
            MIT Press.
          

  
Losh, Elizabeth & Alexander, Jonathan 
(2010). 'A YouTube of one's Own?': 'Coming out'
            narratives as rhetorical action. In Christopher Pullen & Margaret Cooper (Eds.), LGBT
            identity and online new media (pp. 23-36). New York, NY: Routledge.
          

  
Losh, Elizabeth
 (2011) Shooting for the public: YouTube, Flickr, and the Mavi Marmara
            shootings. In Geert Lovink & Rachel Somers Miles (Eds.), Video vortex reader II (pp.
            283-292). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Institute of Network Cultures.
          

  
Losh, Elizabeth
 (2012). Channeling Obama: YouTube, Flickr, and the social media
            president. Comparative American Studies 10(2-3) (forthcoming).
          

  
Loviglio, J. 
(2005). Radio's intimate public: network broadcasting and mass-mediated
            democracy. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
          

  
Lubin, D.
 (2003). Shooting Kennedy: JFK and the culture of images. Berkeley: University
            of California Press.
          

  
Lynch, Marc
 (2006). Voices of the new Arab public: Iraq, Al-Jazeera, and Middle East
            politics today. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
          

  
Manovich, Lev
 (2001). The Language of New Media. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
          

  
Manovich, Lev
 (2007). Cultural analytics. [White paper]. Retrieved from
            http://lab.softwarestudies.com/2008/09/cultural-analytics.html.
          

  
Manovich, Lev
 (2009a). Cultural analytics: Visualizing cultural patterns in the era of
            'more media.' DOMUS (Spring 2009). Milan.
          

  
Manovich, Lev
 (2009b). The practice of everyday (media) life: From mass consumption
            to mass cultural production? Critical inquiry 35(2), 319-331.
          

  
Manovich, Lev
 (2010). Software Takes Command. Italian translation: Milan: Edizioni
            Olivares, published as Software Culture. Revised version Continuum, 2013.
          

  
Manovich, Lev 
(2011a). From reading to pattern recognition. In Mieke Gerritzen, Geert
            Lovink, & Minke Kampman (Eds.), I read where I am: Exploring the new information
            cultures. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Valiz.
          

  
Manovich, Lev 
(2011b). "Media Visualization: Visual Techniques for Exploring Large
            Media Collections." in Kelly Gates (Ed.), Media Studies Futures. Blackwell, forthcoming
            2012.
          

  
Manovich, Lev
(2011c). "What is Visualization?" Visual Studies, 26(1), 36-49.
          

  
Manovich, Lev and Jeremy Douglass
 (2011d). "Visualizing Change," Oliver Grau with
            Thomas Veigl (Eds.), Imagery in the 21st Century (pp. 315-338). Cambridge, MA: The
            MIT Press.
          

  
Manovich, Lev
(2012). Trending: The promises and the challenges of big social data. In
            Matthew K. Gold (Ed.), Debates in the digital humanities. The University of Minnesota
            Press.
          

  
McCarty, William
 (2007). Beyond retrieval? Computer science and the humanities.
            Retrieved from http://www.mccarty.org.uk/essays/McCarty,%20Beyond%20 retrieval.pdf
          

  
McKinsey Global Institute 
(2011). Big data: The next frontier for innovation, competition,
            and productivity. New York, NY: McKinsey Global Institute.
          

  
Navas, Eduardo 
(2012). "Modular Complexity: The Collapse of Time and Space into
            Search." AnthroVision journal. France: Lyon, forthcoming Spring/Summer 2012.
          

  
Olson, L. C., Finnegan, C. A., & Hope, D. S. 
(2008). Visual rhetoric: a reader in
            communication and American culture. Los Angeles: Sage
          

  
Oomen, Johan, et al.
(2009). Images for the future: Unlocking the value of audiovisual
            heritage. In J. Trant & D. Bearman (Eds.), Museums and the Web 2009: Proceedings.
            Toronto: Archives & Museum Informatics.
          

  
Pantti, Mervi
 (2009). Misfortunes, memories and sunsets: Non-professional images in
            Dutch news media. International Journal of Cultural Studies 12(5), 471-489.
          

  
Pasma, Trijntje
 (2011). Metaphor and register variation: The personalization of Dutch
            news discourse. Amsterdam: Vrije Universiteit.
          

  
Postman, Neil 
(1992). How to watch TV news. New York, NY: Penguin Books.
          

  
Rodrigues, Isabel Galhano 
(2010). Gesture space and gesture choreography in
            European Portuguese and African Portuguese interactions: A pilot study of two cases.
            Gesture in embodied communication and human-computer interaction. Berlin: Springer.
          

  
Sarkar, Sudeep. et al. 
(2005). The humanID gait challenge problem: Data sets,
            performance, and analysis. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
            Intelligence, 27(2), 162-177.
          

  
Seinstra, Frank J. et al. 
(2007). High-performance distributed image and video content
            analysis with parallel-Horus. IEEE Multimedia 14(4), 64-75.
          

  
Snoek, Cees and Smeulders
 (2010). Visual-concept search solved? IEEE Computer
            43(6), 76- 78.
          

  
Snoek, Cees et al. 
(2004-2010). The MediaMill TRECVID 2004-2010 semantic video
            search engine. In Proceedings from TRECVID Workshops. Gaithersburg, MD.
          

  
Ubois, Jeff 
(2005). New approaches to television archiving. First Monday 10(3).
            Retrieved from
            http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1210/1130.
          

  
UCLA Film & Television Archive, UCLA MA Program in Moving Image Archive Studies
            and INA (Institut National de l'Audiovisuel, France) and Ina SUP European Centre for
            Research, Training and Education on Digital Media
 (2010). Reimaging the Archive:
              Remapping and Remixing Traditional Models in the Digital Era [Conference]. Retrieved
            from http://polaris.gseis.ucla.edu/reimagining/statement.htm.
          

  
van de Sande, Koen E. A., Gevers, Theo & Snoek, Cees 
(2010). Evaluating color
            descriptors for object and scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
            Machine Intelligence 32(9), 1582-1596.
          

  
van de Sande, Koen E. A., Gevers, Theo & Snoek, Cees 
(2011). Empowering visual
            categorization with the GPU. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 13(1), 60-70.
          

  
Yamaoka, S., L. Manovich, J. Douglass, F. Kuester
 (2011). "Cultural Analytics in Large-
            Scale Visualization Environments." IEEE Computer, December 2011.
          

  
Zepel, Tara
 (2011). Culture as data as culture : Re-presenting the videostyle of the 2008
            presidential campaign ads. In Geert Lovink & Rachel Somers Miles (Eds.), Video vortex
            reader II (pp. 234-239). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Institute of Network Cultures 

