DHArchive
dharchive
.org
 Print
 XML
The Inherited Self: Reappraising Literary Cultural Heritage through Digital Methods

    
Category:
Poster

      
Session:
2

      
Date:
2014-07-10
Time:
16:00:00

      
Room:
Amphipôle Common Area

    

        
Malm
,
									
Mats Ulrik

        

          

        
University of Gothenburg, Sweden

      

      

        
Bergenmar
,
									
Jenny

        

          

        
University of Gothenburg, Sweden

      

      

        
Kokkinakis
,
									
Dimitrios

        

          

        
University of Gothenburg, Sweden

      

      

        
Leonard
,
									
Peter

        

          

        
Librarian for Digital Humanities Research, Yale University

      

    

  

  

  

  
This project proposes new approaches to cultural heritage by
developing new methods of working with digital texts and by defining appropriate
research questions. Our goal is to find ways of turning literature,
especially prose fiction, into a site of dynamic research in the humanities
and social sciences, rather than merely a passive digital repository.

  
Our point of departure is the
view of cultural heritage as largely intended, or willed, to convey a
specific collective memory and identity. This perspective in turn strongly
affects the construction of individual identity. From this the project elaborates
two main conclusions: 1) In order to fully understand our cultural
heritage, it is essential to analyse it against the self-understanding of the cultures
that produced it — evading or by-passing the structures of literary canon-formation. 2)
Focussing on the issue of identity
is an efficient way of developing methodology and performing analysis.

  
The project is designed to

  
Benefit from a corpus of specially-prepared material where questions
of canon formation can be explored through 
marginalized and forgotten literary works

    
Develop 
new methods of working

with the specific forms of cultural heritage embodied in electronic text
databases

    
Develop new perspectives and methods through 
interdisciplinary exchange and cooperation
 on these text databases.

  
Although the primary material of the pilot project is Swedish, all parts
of the project are planned to be generalizable, scalable and relevant
to other literary traditions. The main material of the investigations consists of
three corpora: The literary works of August Strindberg (based on recently-finalized
scholarly editions), the literary works of Selma Lagerlöf (all first editions,
established and proofread in collaboration with the scholarly edition), and all
original Swedish prose fiction that was first published in the years 1800,
1820, 1840, 1860, 1880 and 1900. 

  
These three corpora offer an
apposite opportunity to compare and collate results: Strindberg and Lagerlöf
are both canonized, fairly contemporary but entirely different authors: one
male and intensely occupied with the societal issues of his day, the other
female and developing her own kind of “saga” style, interested in social issues
but in a more indirect way. While Strindberg and Lagerlöf belong to Sweden’s
most renowned and internationally famous authors, the Swedish Prose Fiction
database has been constructed in order to evade canonical selection. Comprising
all publications that match the criteria, it offers ways into both mainstream works
and those that have been entirely marginalised. 

  
As this project arises from the view of culture as an issue of identity,
and of cultural heritage as the performative expression of collective memory
and identity, the research questions focus on issues of identity: both collective and individual. Since fiction’s main
means of portraying problems and ideas is the individual character, the studies
start out with the individual in order to reach conclusions also about
collective identity. The research questions include issues of identity in
connection to ethnicity, society, gender and consumption patterns.

  
The project thus explores and
develops different forms of materials, techniques, methods and co-operations,
which are to result in new combinations of quantitative and qualitative
analysis. In particular, we aim at refining methods of “distant reading”, as
once proposed by Franco Moretti (Moretti, 2005, 2006), into new approaches that
focus on content and context (cf. Jockers, 2013). We use the new tool for
sub-corpus topic modeling (STM) designed by Peter Leonard (Leonard and
Tangherlini, 2013), which makes it possible to extract topics from a particular
work and run against larger materials. We also plan to enhance topic modeling
further by adding Named Entity Recognition (NER) and sentiment analysis (cf.
Liu, 2010, Maas et al., 2011) to existing systems. NER has been refined,
adapted and extended in connection with this project in Kokkinakis and Oelke,
2012, Oelke et al. 2012, Kokkinakis and Malm 2011, 2013; cf. Yang et al., 2011.


  
At the poster presentation, we
will demonstrate materials and techniques on lap-tops. 

  
References

  
Jockers, M. 
(2013).
Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.

  
Kokkinakis, D. and Malm, M.
 (2011).
Character Profiling in 19th Century Fiction. In Workshop: Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural
Heritage in conjunction with the Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP). Hissar, pp. 70-77.

  
Kokkinakis, D. and Oelke, D. 
(2012). Men, Women and Gods: Distant Reading in
Literary Collections – Combining Visual Analytics with Language Technology.
In Proceedings of the Advances in Visual
Methods for Linguistics (AVML). University of York.

  
Kokkinakis D. and Malm M.
 (2013). A
Macroanalytic View of Swedish Literature using Topic Modeling. In Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics. Andrew
Hardie and Robbie Love (eds), Lancaster: UCREL, pp. 144-147.

  
Leonard, P. and Tangherlini, T.
 (2013). Trawling
in the Sea of the Great Unread: Sub-Corpus Topic Modeling and Humanities
Research. Poetics, 
41
:
725-749.

  
Liu, Bing. 
(2010). Sentiment Analysis
and Subjectivity. In Indurkhya, N. and Damerau, F. J. (eds), Handbook of Natural Language Processing.
Boca Raton, Fla: CRC Press, pp. 627-659.

  
Maas, A. L., Daly, R. E., Pham P. T., Huang, D.,
Ng, A. Y. and Potts, C.
 (2011). Learning Word Vectors for Sentiment Analysis.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). Portland, pp.
142-150.

  
Moretti, F.
 (2005). Graphs, Maps, Trees. Abstract Models for
Literary History. London: Verso.

  
Moretti, F.
 ed. 
(2006). The Novel. History, Geography, and Culture
1-2. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

  
Oelke, D., Kokkinakis, D. and Malm, M.
 (2012).
Advanced Visual Analytics Methods for Literature Analysis. In Language Technology for Cultural Heritage,
Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH), an EACL Workshop. Avignon:
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 35-44.

  
Yang, T., Torget, A. T. and Mihalcea, R.
 (2011). Topic
Modeling on Historical Newspapers. In Proceedings
of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage,
Social Sciences, and Humanities. Portland: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 96-104.

