DHArchive
dharchive
.org
 Print
 XML
The Annotated Star: A Collaborative Digital Edition of Rosenzweig’s Star of Redemption

    
Category:
Poster

      
Session:
1

      
Date:
2014-07-10
Time:
14:00:00

      
Room:
Amphipôle Common Area

    

        
Handelman
,
									
Matthew

        

          

        
Michigan State University

      

      

        
Wygoda
,
									
Ynon 

        

          

        
Hebrew University, Yale University

      

      

        
Rojansky
,
									
Shay  

        

          

        
Eagle TS R&D

      

      

        
Rusinek
,
									
Sinai 

        

          

        
Van Leer Institute Jerusalem

      

    
For the Digital Humanities Conference 2014, we propose to present a poster discussing
our project, “The Annotated Star”: a collaborative, dynamic edition that combines
the traditional critical edition with the potential of digital technologies.
1
 The poster will draw on our international collaboration developing an open-source,
web-based text annotation interface and explore the practical and theoretical
implications of our collaborative editing and computer-aided quote-mining of Franz
Rosenzweig’s (1886-1929) philosophical-theological monograph Star of Redemption (1921). Drawing on a
host of interdisciplinary, interfaith and stylistic sources from the German and
Jewish cultural tradition, religious texts, and the natural sciences, Rosenzweig’s
writings not only serve as an exceptional model - in form as well as in content - for the future of digital
textual collaboration.
2
 Even
more so, as we hope to demonstrate, the digital editing of Rosenzweig’s text also serves as the impetus for a discussion over how computer technologies can help us rethink, reposition
and enhance the traditional hermeneutic task of close and critical reading in
the digital age. 

  
The poster
and our presentation will center on the two key aspects of our project. First, they
will outline our construction of an online, collective annotation graphical user
interface, designed to allow users to upload their own comments, links, and
annotations to the digitized text. At first based on Rosenzweig’s Star of
Redemption, such a website will be easily adaptable for other base texts and
will link, display, and organize digitized versions of the reference texts from
which the base text quotes. The finished site will store previously marked
annotations, allow for user input, and display linked texts, as the following
screenshots illustrate: 

  

    
Fig. 1: Prototype Screenshots of the GUI

    

  
Such a
platform enables and stores collaboratively defined, hyper-textual linkages
between Star of Redemption and, for
instance, Goethe’s Faust or Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason – if not for any
text within, or even beyond, the humanities. Yet the parallel display of texts
enabled by digital technology does not supplant our traditional understanding
of close reading, but rather enhances close reading, while visualizing the processes of
textual reference and reassembly that serve at its foundation. 

  
Second,
our poster and presentation will discuss our implementation of an automatic
text re-use detection tool, which we are currently using to detect textual
overlaps between Star of Redemption
and the growing canon of digitized literature, philosophy and the natural
sciences. With this tool we hope to use information technologies to unearth
moments in which Rosenzweig quotes from sources without citing them and, thus,
to provide automated data for the collaborative website discussed above. As our poster explores, the
upshot of the project is the discovery of new references in Star of Redemption and, with them, a
deeper understanding of the rich layers of philosophical, Rabbinic, literary
and cultural commentary hidden yet ubiquitous in Rosenzweig’s text.
Furthermore, it would allow us to revisit, reformulate and re-map the networks
of intertextuality and textual re-use that, at their core, inform our
hermeneutic and humanistic questions in the present. 

  
Ultimately, we hope to provide more than just
a demonstration of a collective critical edition of Rosenzweig’s Star of Redemption, more, too, than an
open-source annotation and editing tool. Rather, by looking at how developments
in digital technologies and the Digital Humanities aid in our understanding of
a text key to both German and Jewish Studies, it provides us the opportunity to
address questions central to the evolving field of the Digital Humanities. Our
poster on the “Annotated Star,” in other words, will explore how the digital
revolution redefines and simultaneously solidifies the task of humanistic scholarship. Perhaps most
importantly, it also explores and seeks to engender discussion around numerous
philosophical concepts – such as Rosenzweig’s ideas on truth and collaboration,
translation and language – that enable us to think critically through the new
possibilities the Digital Humanities offer for humanistic scholarship and
inquiry.

  
References

  
1. For the history and typology of dynamic textual editing, see 
Ray Siemens et al.
, Towards Modeling the Social Edition, in Literary and Linguistic Computing, (2012): 445-61, especially 446-9.
          

  
2. 
Peter E. Gordon, Rosenzweig and Heidegge
 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003), 
Mara Benjamin
, Rosenzweig’s Bible (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009),  the contributions to the Rosenzweig Yearbook, vol 2: Criticism of Islam, ed. Martin Brasser (Freiburg: Karl Alber, 2007).
          

