DHArchive
dharchive
.org
 Print
 XML
Introduction to Starting and Sustaining DH Centers

    
Category:
Workshops

      
Session:

      
Date:
2014-07-08
Time:
09:00:00

      
Room:
2A - SwissTech

    

        
Siemens
,
									
Lynne

        

          

        
University of Victoria

      

    

  
1. Introduction to Starting and Sustaining DH Centers

  
Description

  
Digital Humanities is growing in scale from a series projects undertaken by a couple of individuals to institutionally-based organizations, with larger budgets and mandates, beyond other factors. How can a group of interested researchers, academic staff, librarians and other invested stakeholders work together to create such a centre? This half-day workshop will address this question by exploring issues related to scaling operations from the individual to a centre, determining the appropriate organizational model, developing the plan which situates the DH centre in the academic institution’s and other stakeholders’ mandates, communicating to administration to gain support and resources, structuring memorandums of understanding between partners, and other issues.  It builds on centerNet’s iniatitives to support center startups with information and tools, which include the DHCenterStartUp listserv and resources page (
http://digitalhumanities.org/centernet/resources-for-starting-and-sustaining-dh-centers/
).

  
Workshop leader

  
Dr. Lynne Siemens, Assistant Professor, School of Public Administration, University of Victoria and centerNet’s Coordinator for Center Startups with centerNet.

  
Dr. Siemens is an Assistant Professor at the University of Victoria.  Her interests include academic entrepreneurship, collaboration and teamwork with a focus on understanding methods and processes to facilitate collaborative research across distances, disciplines and organizational boundaries.  Beyond publishing in these areas, she has taught workshops in Project Management at University of Victoria’s Digital Humanities Summer Institute and University of Leipzig's European Summer School for Culture and Technology and serves as a management advisor for Implementing New Knowledge Environments (INKE), a Major Collaborative Research Initiative project.  Dr. Siemens is also centerNet’s Coordinator for Center Startups and coordinates the DHCenterStartUp listserv and the resources for starting DH centers webpage.

  
CenterNet is an international network of digital humanities centers.  Part of its mandate is to support the development of centers at a variety of institutions by sharing information, resources and expertise.

  
Contact Information

  
Lynne Siemens

  
School of Public Administration

  
University of Victoria

  
Victoria, British Columbia Canada

  
V8W 2Y2

  
(250) 721-8069

  
siemensl@uvic.ca

  
Target audience and expected number of participants

  
The target audience is individuals interested in starting a Digital Humanities center at their institution. Expected number of participants is 15-20. (These numbers are in line with previous offerings of similar workshops/talks.)

  
Intended length and format of workshop

  
The workshop will be a half-day with a combination of lecture and discussion. No special technical requirements or equipment is needed.

