DHArchive
dharchive
.org
 Print
 XML
Annotation Studio: an open-source, collaborative multimedia online note-taking tool for humanities teaching and learning

    
Category:
Workshops

      
Session:

      
Date:
2014-07-08
Time:
09:00:00

      
Room:
3B - SwissTech

    

        
Fendt
,
									
Kurt

        

          

        
MIT, United States of America

      

      

        
Folsom
,
									
Jamie

        

          

        
MIT, United States of America

      

      

        
Schnepper
,
									
Rachel

        

          

        
MIT, United States of America

      

      

        
Andrew
,
									
Liam

        

          

        
MIT, United States of America

      

    

  
Description

  
Annotation Studio is a collaborative online annotation tool
developed at Hyperstudio, Center for Digital Humanities at MIT, for teaching
and learning in the humanities. It is funded by the National Endowment for the
Humanities and is one of several annotation tools that incorporate The
Annotator from the Open Knowledge Foundation (annotatorjs.org), thereby
benefiting from and participating in the highly collaborative community around
that code library.

  
This is a half-day (3-hour) workshop for educators, administrators,
librarians, developers and technologists interested in exploring what
Annotation Studio has to offer. The content and format has been refined based
on feedback from workshops delivered over several years. All participants will
come away with an understanding of the tool and what it can do.

  
In addition, we aim to convey the adaptability of Annotation
Studio and to illustrate how individuals and institutions can adopt it,
integrate it into humanities teaching and learning, deploy it, extend it for
specific use cases, and how to contribute back to the growing community of
practitioners.

  
We’ll open with a walkthrough of the tool and its
functionality, then quickly move to structured hands-on work, followed by
focused discussions and a final Q&A and networking opportunity. In the
hands-on session, all participants will take on the roles of readers, writers,
and instructors. Through this exchange of roles, all will gain a comprehensive
understanding of the functionality of the tool. Participants will then choose
one of two breakout sessions--one on pedagogy and theory or one on development
and deployment--to focus on their more particular areas of interest. 

  
Pedagogy, curriculum, and theory. Participants in this
session, led by Hyperstudio Director Kurt Fendt and Communications Officer
Rachel Schnepper, will gain insights from instructors into how the tool has
been used in humanities teaching, examples of assignments and ways to integrate
the tool into the curriculum, and discuss possible new applications of
annotation in their own field. Forms of assessment will be discussed as well.

    
In the development, deployment, and administration
session, led by Hyperstudio Web Applications Developer Jamie Folsom and
Research Assistant Liam Andrew, participants will look at how they can add
features to the tool, deploy it on their own infrastructure, and contribute
their feature changes back to the project for use by others. We will invite
technologists attending the conference who have adopted Annotation Studio to
share their experience in this session.

  
In both sessions, we will introduce an online support forum we
are using to facilitate conversations across time and distance, and invite all
participants to join that conversation.

  
Outline

  

Overview

  
Goals of the workshop

    
Tour of the tool

    
Resources including support forum and user manual

  
Hands-on 

  
Reader
Read and annotate
Search and organize annotations
Compose and get feedback

    

Instructor
Add and manage documents
Create groups and organize tasks
View and assess readers’ work

  
Break out sessions

  
Pedagogy, Curriculum, and Theory
Sample syllabi and assignments
Discussion of classroom integration 
Assessment
Use cases by participants

    
Development, Deployment, and Administration
Run an instance of the application
Customize the application
Contribute to the project

  
Debrief

  
Discussion, feedback, support

    
Q&A / Brainstorm (discussion)

    
Networking (marketplace)

  
Target Audience

  
The target audiences for this workshop include: students,
instructors, developers, and administrators in the humanities, in both formal
and informal settings. In the past, this workshop has attracted between 30 and
40 participants from diverse fields and institutions. All participants should
bring a laptop equipped with Wi-Fi with the latest Google Chrome, Safari, or
Mozilla Firefox web browser installed prior to the workshop. The application
does not work offline and does not work in Internet Explorer.

  
Core content

  
Annotation Studio is an easy-to-use platform for collaborative note
taking and commenting with a special focus on education. This workshop provides
an introduction to the application (30 minutes), and hands-on practice in
different roles (60 minutes). Two breakout sessions will address topics of
interest to specific audiences in more depth (60 minutes). The workshop wraps
up with 30 minutes of question/answer, feedback, and networking.

  
Length and format

  
Part 1: Intro, (30 minutes)

  
Part 2: Hands-on (60 minutes)

  
Part 3: Breakouts (60 minutes)

  
Part 4: Debrief (30 minutes)

  
Workshop Organizers

  

    
Kurt Fendt
, Executive
Director, MIT Hyperstudio

  

  
Dr. Kurt Fendt is Principal Research Associate in Comparative
Media Studies and Executive Director of HyperStudio – Digital Humanities at
MIT. He teaches a range of upper-level German Studies courses in Foreign
Languages and Literatures. Fendt has held Visiting Professorships at the University
of Cologne, the Technical University of Aachen (both Germany), and the
University of Klagenfurt, Austria; in 2001 he was Visiting Scientist at the
Fraunhofer Institute in Sankt Augustin, Germany. He is co-Principal
Investigator of Annotation Studio, an NEH-funded web application for multimedia
annotation in humanities education. Since 2005, he has been organizing the MIT
European Short Film Festival. Before coming to MIT in 1993, Fendt was Assistant
Professor in the Department of Applied Linguistics at the University of Bern in
Switzerland, where he established the Media Learning Center for the Humanities
and earned his Ph.D. in modern German literature with a thesis on hypertext and
text theory in 1993 after having completed his MA at the Ludwig-Maximilians-University
in Munich, Germany.

  

    
Jamie Folsom
, Lead Web
Applications Developer, MIT Hyperstudio

  

  
Jamie builds tools to support teaching and research in the
humanities. He participates in all aspects of the lab's work, from consulting
with faculty and collaborating with partners, to developing and deploying web
apps and services, to presenting the lab’s work and training people on the use
of its tools at conferences. He has extensive experience teaching with and
about technology, managing technology projects, and building web sites and
applications.

  
He is particularly interested in the technical challenges
peculiar to Digital Humanities Centers: how to conceive, design and develop
tools highly tailored to specific research and instructional goals, while
remaining agile enough to serve a range of disciplines and fields.

  
He holds an AB in French from Vassar College and a Master's
Degree in Technology in Education from Harvard University, and has been a
teacher, a technology trainer and manager, and a web applications developer for
20 years. He is from Boston, Massachusetts.

  

    
Rachel Schnepper,

Communications Officer, MIT Hyperstudio

  

  
As Communications Officer, Rachel brings over ten years of
higher education experience with her to HyperStudio. Prior to working at
HyperStudio, Rachel taught at Rutgers University, Princeton University, DePaul
University, and Washington and Lee University. Accordingly, Rachel is
intimately familiar with the needs of faculty and is committed to helping them
integrate digital humanities tools into their research and teaching.

  
Rachel earned her PhD in early modern European history in 2010
from Rutgers University. The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the North American
Conference on British Studies have supported her research, which focuses on
media transformations in the seventeenth century English Atlantic.

  

    
Liam Andrew
, Research
Assistant, MIT Hyperstudio

  

  
Liam Andrew graduated from Yale University in 2008, where he
studied the advent of sound recording and its influence on modern language,
literature and music. After stints as a book indexer, French-to-English
translator, archivist, and English teacher abroad, he dove into programming and
emerged as a software engineer for Delve, a newsreader and aggregator that
helps organizations find and share important reads. As a graduate student in
MIT’s Comparative Media Studies program, his research interests lie at the
intersection of sound and text on one hand, and classification and
recommendation systems on the other. He is also a sound designer for theater
and multi-instrumentalist in 
Dinowalrus
.

  

    
Contact

  

  

    
Kurt Fendt, Executive Director, MIT HyperStudio

  

  
MIT HyperStudio

  
MIT Room 16-635

  
77 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

  
phone: 617-253-4312

  
skype: kendt

  
email: 
fendt@mit.edu

  
twitter: @fendt

  

    
Jamie Folsom, Lead Web Applications Developer

  

  
MIT HyperStudio

  
MIT Room 16-635

  
77 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

  
mobile: 617-669-0852

  
skype: jamiefolsom

  
email: 
jfolsom@mit.edu

  
twitter: @jamiefolsom

  

    
Rachel Schnepper, Communications Officer

  

  
MIT HyperStudio

  
MIT Room 16-635

  
77 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

  
phone: 617-324-0102

  
email: 
rschnepp@mit.edu

  

    
Liam Andrew, Research Assistant

  

  
MIT HyperStudio

  
MIT Room 16-635

  
77 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

  
email: 
landrew@mit.edu

