


A Computational Perspective on Allusion 

Most literary allusion, the deliberate evocation by one text of a passage in another, is based
upon text reuse. Yet most instances of textual similarity are not meaningful literary allusions. The
goal of the Tesserae project (
http://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu
) is to automatically detect allusion in a corpus of
literary texts, primarily Classical Latin poetry. We begin with a large set of textual parallels,
and then attempt to model which of these instances of text reuse are meaningful literary allusions
and which are not, according to a group of human readers. While initial attempts with a few basic
textual features have proven surprisingly effective, here we employ a more complex feature set and
machine learning techniques drawn from the field of computer vision in an attempt to improve the
results. Novel applications of machine learning, beyond the well known but constrained textual
classification tasks of attribution and categorization, have the potential to be transformative for
complex analysis tasks in the Digital Humanities.





Benchmark Data

As an illustration, we consider textual parallels between Book 1 of Lucan’s 
Bellum
Civile
 and the entirety of Vergil’s 
Aeneid

(Coffee et al. 2012). Our benchmark dataset comprises a list of 3,400 pairs of
sentences that share at least two different words. Each of these pairs has been read and graded for
its literary significance by a group of students and faculty working in small teams. These annotator
rankings range from 1 (no literary significance) to 5 (pointed literary allusion). 





Learning Relevant Features

Earlier work showed that high-ranked parallels could be distinguished from the others with modest
accuracy using only word frequency, distance between words, and the presence of exact form matching
versus differently-inflected forms of the same word (Gawley et al. 2012).
Nevertheless, others have recommended more sophisticated approaches to this problem (Bamman and Crane 2008). Here we consider an expanded feature set including bi-gram frequency, frequency of individual words, character-level n-grams and edit distances. Our goal is to learn
relevant combinations of features in the presence of often incomplete data.


Recent work by members of our team has developed new methods for tuning machine-learning using
support vector machines (Scheirer et al. 2012) and random forests (Xiong et al. 2012). Random forest is of particular interest, providing robust feature selection that shows promise for literary analysis (Tabata 2012). The problem of
missing data is prevalent in all areas of literary study, but is not well addressed by existing
algorithms in common use by digital humanists. This is especially true for ancient texts, where we
often find a significant gap in the manuscript tradition. Using principled strategies for imputation
and marginalization, we reduce the impact on the results. 





Results and Implications

Our ability to learn the difference between high-ranked parallels (ranks 4 & 5) and
low-ranked parallels (ranks 1 & 2) for 
Bellum Civile
 and the 
Aeneid
 is strong:
random forest achieves an average AUC score between 82% and 83%, while linear SVMs yield an average
score of 81.5%. This suggests that quantifiable patterns do exist across allusions, which can be
captured algorithmically. In this ongoing research we seek a more successful model of literary
significance that will allow our software to put interesting allusions at the top of the list; at
the same time, we hope it will also cast new light on the underlying structures of our experience of
literature.


An interactive demonstration of the Tesserae allusion detection tool accompanies this
poster.









Notes


Bamman, D., and G. Crane
 (2008). The Logic and Discovery of Textual Allusion. LaTeCH
Coffee, N., J.-P. Koenig, S. Poorima, C. W. Forstall,  R. Ossewaarde, and S. Jacobson
 (2012). Intertextuality in the digital age. 
Transactions of the American Philological
Association
, 142(2).
Gawley, J., C. W. Forstall, and N. Coffee
 (2012). Evaluating the literary significance of text re-use in Latin poetry. 
DHCS
Scheirer, W. J.,  A. Rocha, J.Parris, and T. E. Boult
 (2012). Learning for meta-recognition. IEEE T-IFS 7.
Tabata, T.
 (2012). Approaching Dickens’ style through random forests. 
DH
.
Xiong, C., D. Johnson, R. Xu, and J. J. Corso
 (2012). Random forests for metric
learning with implicit pairwise position dependence. 
ACM SIGKDD
.
 
*Work supported by NEH Start-Up Grant Award No. HD-51570-12 

