

How can digital scholarly editions take full advantage of environmentally-generated opportunities
to focus on process, collaboration, and distributed control without losing the traditional
affordances that make an edition “scholarly?” The Modeling and Prototyping Team of the Implementing
New Knowledge Environments (INKE) project is currently exploring ways in which the scholarly edition
can be re-imagined within digital settings. Our prototypes function as virtual environments that
encourage play within their designed frames, and as Galey and Ruecker (2010) have argued, the
trajectory of prototype iterations establishes a valuable record of critical enquiry. In this
spirit, we wonder whether the digital scholarly edition, in addition to being perceived as an
environment which is a trace record of the theoretical and argumentative motivations that inform the
editorial processes of selection, organization and design, could actively and dynamically host the
formation of multiple, simultaneous, and community generated editions. Material print editions are
records, artefacts that efface the process of their formation, version-objects that assert an
argument and establish a historical position through the printed finality of their collation and
production. If digital editions are to take full advantage of their environments (rather than simply
emulating print traditions) they need to visibly include both process and product, and offer
opportunities for editorial diligence, contribution, perspective, control and debate to their users.
Top-down forms of authoritative and exclusive editorial selectivity become ironic and anachronistic
in dynamic digital environments which privilege “a new kind of scholarly discourse network that
eschews traditional institutionally-reinforced hierarchical structures” (Siemens 2011). We are
exploring modelling the digital scholarly edition as a social edition workspace in which a community
of users can contribute content and emerge from the debilitating condition that William Blake
described as “single vision.”



In this spirit, and to provide essential opportunities for user-based contributions and
scholarship within digital edition environments, the INKE Modeling and Prototyping team is currently
developing a software environment called NewRadial that significantly reinvents an earlier prototype
designed by Saklofske and Giffin (2009) and builds on earlier conceptual work by Nowviskie (2007)
and Saklofske (2010, 2011). NewRadial’s collaborative space is a reimagining of the digital
scholarly edition as a transparent workspace layer in which established primary objects from
existing databases can be gathered, organized, correlated, annotated, and augmented by multiple
users in a dynamic environment that also features centralised margins for secondary scholarship and
debate. The INKE NewRadial prototype—consisting of an HTML5 frontend and server-based backend—is a
workspace that uses simple adapters to query databases for specific results, and then uses those
results to harvest representations of the objects (i.e. thumbnails) to populate its workspace.
Linked data and annotations produced by a community of users in relation to these objects within
NewRadial’s environment then become available to other applications. Our focus on relational data
models, scalable data browsing, and crowd-sourced descriptive frameworks means that the INKE
NewRadial prototype is being designed as an effective means for working with all types of media
objects, for aggregating search results from multiple databases using meta-adapters, and for making
its RDF-based secondary scholarship and annotation data available over HTTP for use in other tools
and workspaces. Currently, our prototype installation has successfully used adapters to import
NINES/ARC data, the Archbook image repository, Google images and other scholarly database holdings. 


NewRadial’s affordances introduce a dynamic multiplicity of vision into what has traditionally
been a reductive, oppositional and snail’s pace process of inter-edition debate and evolution. The
development of this digital edition environment prototype is the first step towards creating
inclusive editorial workspaces which draw from broad data foundations and which encourage
knowledge-building communities to actively reimagine edition-building processes. This
poster/demonstration session is designed to offer conference participants hand-on experience with
the INKE NewRadial prototype and to demonstrate the ways that the unique affordances and flexibility
of this workspace impacts the nature of scholarly editing, the scholarly edition itself, and the
secondary scholarship that such editions generate. 










Galey, A., and S. Ruecker
 (2010). How a Prototype Argues. 
LLC
, 25(4): 405-424.
Nowviskie, B.
 (2007). Collex: Collections and Exhibits for the Remixable Web. 
Electronic Book
Review
. 1-17.
Saklofske, J.
 (2011). Remediating William Blake: Unbinding the Narrative Architectures of Blake’s Songs. 
European Romantic Review
 22(3): 381-88.
Saklofske, J.
 (2010). NewRadial: Re-visualizing the Blake Archive. In 
Poetess Archive Journal
.  2(1).
Saklofske, J., and J. M. Giffin
 (2009). NewRadial. 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/newradial/
Siemens, R., et al.
 Toward Modeling the Social Edition: An Approach to Understanding the
Electronic Scholarly Edition in the Context of New and Emerging Social Media, Accepted for
publication in 
Literary and Linguistic Computing.
 70. 

