



Introduction

      
Digital maps can today ensure a convenient and efficient rendering of geographical information
in real time. Perhaps the best-known source for providing a search interface to the contents of
tens of millions of computers on the internet, together with free of charge digital maps for anyone
to use, is the Google Map server. The development of digital maps supported by Google is to a
large extent driven by the needs of the industry whose requirements range from weather maps to
driving instructions obtained from GPS information. Because of this focus, geographical
locations which are found in literary texts — e.g. no longer existing places or older name variants
– are not guaranteed to be available in this pool of modern digital maps. Moreover, freely
available digital maps are naturally not optimized for all kinds of applications. The maps
available on the internet are often copyright-protected. This lack of flexibility and the need to
point to geographical locations of places that are found in literary texts are two of the main
reasons why our group at 
Språkbanken
 ‘the Swedish Language Bank’
1
 have decided to
investigate an alternative open-source solution, a platform called MapServer (Kropla 2005).
2






Språkbanken

     
The Swedish Language Bank is a research unit which focuses on developing linguistic resources
and tools for use by researchers and online visitors from different research fields such as
linguistics, language technology, and language learning (Borin et al., 2012a; 2012b). It offers
access to a vast amount of written natural language text resources including historical and literary
texts. Recently, we have recognized the need of combining place-name recognition with
geographical information systems as an alternative source of valuable information about the texts
and a way to increase text understanding. The role of geographic visualization in the language
learning and usage has been explored in various projects (Lieberman, et al. 2010; Gregory and
Hardie 2011; Bibiko 2012).






MapServer at Språkbanken


MapServer is an open source Geographic Information System (GIS) development environment
for producing maps from geographic data on the Web.
3
 Its overall architecture is depicted in
figure 1. The user interface provides two different ways to render geographic information: (1)
static maps to present a small number of places that appear within the same geographical location
and (2) dynamic maps that allow the user to change the amount of data appearing on the map in
real time. The geographical dataset consists of both spatial and attribute data and is acquired from
Geofabrik.
4
 It contains raw data (Open Street Map format) and shape files (Haklay and Weber,
2008).
5



Figure 1.
The client-server architecture of MapServer.
MapServer accesses an MySQL database to perform coordinate place-name search. This database
is automatically maintained by accessing and extracting place-names from the GeoNames
database.
6
 Because the GeoNames database contains redundant information about place locations,
disambiguation is performed. The disambiguation algorithm calculates the Euclidian distance
(using the Pythagorean theorem) between places with the same name. If two or more places with
the same name occur within three kilometers of each other, only one of these occurrences is
added to the database, the one with the most recent modification date. In the case of modification
date ties, the place with the highest latitude value is kept.






Visualization of automatically recognized place-names


The named entity recognizer (NER) and annotator used for annotating place names from Swedish
literature (Borin et al., 2007; Borin and Kokkinakis 2010) automatically extracts names across
large collections of texts with very high precision. In the kind of texts we are dealing with, the
distribution of place entities across the whole document is quite common. The reader may
sometimes lose track of where the story takes place, in particular if the plot of the story ranges
over a wide geographical area. For example, in classical Swedish author Selma Lagerlöf’s famous
two-part work 
The wonderful adventures of Nils
 more than 50 place names are mentioned. A
reader interested in learning more about these places will benefit from a visualization of their
locations.



With the NER tool it is possible extract the place names mentioned in the text and formulate a
query with these names to the MapServer application which will render a dynamic map pointing
to the geographical locations corresponding to the names. An example is provided in figure 2.



Figure 2.
A dynamic map of the place names mentioned in 
The wonderful adventures of Nils.





Summary
The MapServer application used by the Swedish Language Bank provides new opportunities for
visualizing geographical information found in its large repository of written texts, in particular
literary texts. The application is capable of performing coordinate search on the basis of
recognized place names and rendering both static and dynamic maps that display their
geographical locations.











Bibiko, H. J.
 (2012). Visualization and online presentation of linguistic data. In Frank Seifart,
Geoffrey Haig, Nikolaus P. Himmelmann, Dagmar Jung, Anna Margetts, and Paul
Trilsbeek (eds), 
Potentials of Language Documentation: Methods, Analyses, and
Utilization.
 105–110. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Borin, L., and D. Kokkinakis
 (2010). Literary onomastics and language technology. In Willie van
Peer, Sonia Zyngier, and Vander Viana (eds), 
Literary Education and Digital Learning:
Methods and Technologies for Humanities Studies.
 53–78. Hershey/New York:
Information Science Reference.
Borin, L., D. Kokkinakis, and  L. J. Olsson
 (2007). 
Naming the past: Named entity and
animacy recognition in 19th century Swedish literature. ACL 2007 Workshop on
Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2007).
 1–8
Borin, L.,  M. Forsberg, and J. Roxendal
 (2012a). 
Korp — the corpus infrastructure of
Språkbanken. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12),
 Istanbul, Turkey, May 2012.
Borin, L.,  M. Forsberg, L. J. Olsson, and J.Uppström
 (2012b). 
The open lexical
infrastructure of Språkbanken. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12),
 Istanbul, Turkey, May 2012.
Gregory, I. N. and A. Hardie
 (2011). Visual GISting: bringing together corpus linguistics and
geographical information systems. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing,
3
:297–314.
Haklay, M. and P. Weber
(2008). Open street map: User generated street maps. 
IEEE Pervasive
Computing,
 7: 12-18.
Kropla, B.
 (2005). 
Beginning MapServer: Open source GIS development (expert’s voice in open
source).
 Berkely, CA: Apress.
Lieberman, M. D., H. Samet, and J. Sankaranarayanan
 (2010). 
Geotagging with local lexicons
to build indexes for textually-specified spatial data.
Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on Data Engineering,
 California, USA. 201-212.





http://spraakbanken.gu.se
There are other open-source GIS alternatives, such as GeoServer and PostGIS, that presumably would
serve these needs equally well.
http://www.mapserver.org
http://www.geofabrik.de/data/download.html
http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Sv:Map_Features
http://download.geonames.org/export/dump/



