


The emergence of formal ontologies into the World Wide Web has had a significant effect on
research in certain fields. In parts of the Life Sciences, for example, key research information
has been captured in formal domain ontologies, like those mentioned in the Open Biological and
Biomedical Ontologies website (OBOFoundary 2012). In parallel with this has been the
development of the AO annotation ontology framework (AO 2012) which formalises the act of
annotation as a way to connect ontologies such as those in the OBOFoundary to references to
them in the scientific literature: an act sometimes referred to as "semantic annotation", and
tools such as the SWAN annotation system (SWAN 2008) have emerged to support this. We will
call the activity of linking references in a domain literature directly to entities in one or more
domain ontologies "direct semantic annotation", and show it in schematic form in figure I. The
annotations — shown as heavier lines connecting spots in the literature (to the left) to the
ontologies (to the right) could be expressed in the AO annotation ontology, or something similar
to it.



Figure 1: 
direct semantic annotation
Can direct semantic annotation like this be applied to research in the Humanities? For it to work
as it does in the Life Sciences, formal models of humanities materials, built using an ontology
framework such as CIDOC-CRM, would need to exist and be already accepted as a useful
representation of material of interest to the humanities. Not much of this has happened at
present, although perhaps Linked Data initiatives (Heath and Bizer 2011) show some promise in
that general direction, and we in DDH are both exploring making data from our projects
available in the Semantic Web sense by, for example, setting up SPARQL endpoints, and thinking
about the open-data significance of our structured prosopography model (Pasin and Bradley
2012).



Although open, linked data provides a context for exploring direct semantic annotation and
even though there is evidence of this being thought useful in the Life Sciences, by itself the mere
act of linking a spot in a published online journal to a relevant bit of an online ontology does not
represent anything other than rudimentary research activity in either the Life Sciences or in the
Humanities. Instead, almost all humanities scholars want to spend their time, not connecting
things they read only to an existing, shared, understanding of things, but instead developing
their 
own
 original interpretation of the materials they study, and they aim to subsequently
explore these new concepts and paradigms in articles and books that they write. (see Brockman
et al 2001 and in Palmer 
et al
 2009) For traditional humanists, their scholarship does not start
out only with predefined formal structures such as those provided through their community's
shared concepts, but begins with a set of vague notions and insights that emerge more clearly
over time in the scholar's mind as they read, and that only over time becomes clear enough to
be described in original published work. For most humanists scholarship (a) is normally
personal, (b) is meant to produce original ideas that must first emerge and then mature over
time, and (c) even when the ideas are mature enough for publication, represents a structure
that is at least "pre-ontological", and perhaps at best only partly compatible with the clarity of
ontological modelling.



Surprisingly, however, although products of humanities scholarship do not seem currently to
match the formalisms of computer ontologies as perhaps some of the Life Sciences do, there is
evidence of some degree of inherent structure in the process of creating them. Many
researchers, including Brockman and Palmer mentioned earlier, have noted the importance of
notetaking and the management of those notes in humanities research. We can see a
significantly structured approach around the process of developing new scholarly ideas when
we look at traditional strategies for taking and managing notes as described in books like Altick
and Fenstermaker's 
The Art of Literary Research
 (1992). Altick and Fenstermaker describe
paper-based procedures aimed to provide the new researcher with a methodology to organise
notes taken while reading into a structure of topics and concepts that will eventually contribute
into the writing of articles that represent publishable thinking. There is structure in Altick and
Fenstermaker's approach: figure 2 shows this process in schematic form. We see the original
notes created during the reading of articles and books on the left, these notes contributing
thoughts in the mind of the scholar that eventually allows him to create new concepts in the
middle (only 2 "concepts" are shown here, but a real user would have many more), and
(towards the right) these new emerging concepts fitting with references to original sources and
supporting an argument for new ideas to be presented through the writing of papers. Note the
difference from direct semantic tagging in figure I: the annotations do not link directly to preexisting
formal ontological entities, but first appear as informal prose notes that may, as the
researcher's understanding grows, contribute to a more formal set of ideas and then emerge as
entity-like objects in the form of personally developed new concepts, themes, ideas, etc.



Figure II: 
a model of the flow of ideas in traditional scholarship
If we wish to explore how traditional personal scholarship could connect to the formal world of
RDF and ontology schemes such as the Open Annotations Collaboration (OAC 2011), we need a
model that reflects some of these aspects of the act of doing personal scholarship. The models
behind the Pliny project (Bradley 2008 and 2012) fit this bill, since Pliny was launched precisely
to explore how computing could facilitate exactly this traditional scholarly practice. Pliny tried
to be "Englebartian"— referring to Douglas Englebart's H-LAM/T paradigm (Englebart 1962) that
successful software integrates with the human way of doing intellectual things so well as to
almost disappear, and that this disappearing software can, paradoxically, sometimes allow its
users to do entirely new things that they had been previously incapable of doing. Out of this
work came two models: the interface which developed a particular view of how users might
usefully interact with a note-taking and note management tool to help them develop their own
interpretation, and the data model that stored the information. Bradley 2008 describes Pliny's
user interface in terms of affordances: 2-dimensional space, containment and hierarchy, naming
and labelling and multiple reference of notes material in different contexts, including typing of a
reference.



It turns out that Pliny's data model, as well as being designed to represent aspects of traditional
scholarship in its three phases, is strongly suggestive of RDF and broader ontological
technologies. Like RDF, the structure is a network and the links between the network nodes can
be typed in a way similar to a RDF predicate. Pliny from its first release had the ability to export
its structure into a Topic Web format, and some preliminary work has been done (see Jackson
2010) to map Pliny data into RDF through the OAC ontology. Further work has been carried out
by us to take Jackson's approach further and better map an interpretation as stored in Pliny into
an RDF representation.



The resulting paradigm is one that, unlike direct semantic annotation (as in figure I), separates
the annotation of the domain literature from the highly formal world of shared domain
ontologies by injecting a personal interpretative component in-between. One introduces, in
ways compatible with semantic web technologies, a personal, more informal, and emerging
representation of the scholarship into the picture.



Figure 3: 
The place of a structured personal Interpretation
Figure 3 is similar to the direct semantic annotation model shown in figure 1, but adds a
structured area, representing aspects of the personal interpretative work of an individual,
between a scholar's reading material to the left, and any shared public domain ontologies and
linked data to the top right. This interjected personal interpretation "cloud" might well never be
as clear-cut as formal ontologies must be, but its presence here recognises and enables the

process
 towards formality that is a central part of interpretation in humanities scholarship. By
interposing this somewhat-informal semantic "cloud" between the texts and the formal
ontologies of the semantic web, we see a way of thinking about this central personal
interpretive work that fits with the larger, more formal, semantic web picture. Although it would
seem that the nature of traditional humanities research does not suit the standard direct
semantic annotation model currently active in parts of the Life Sciences, we propose here an
approach that, over time, encourages the researcher to turn their clouds of personal
interpretation into material that might become more and more compatible with computer
ontologies and the semantic web.



This presentation will describe work that was first shown in a preliminary fashion in the
NeDiMaH Ontology workshop at DH2012 (Bradley and Pasin 2012), but that has continued since
then and reaching a significant stage of development.


                








Altick, R. D., and J. J. Fenstermaker
 (1992). 
The Art of Literary Research
. New York: W. W.
Norton & Company.
AO 
 (2012). 
AO: Annotation-ontology
. Website at 
http://code.google.com/p/annotation-ontology/
Bradley, J.
 (2008). Thinking about Interpretation: Pliny and Scholarship in the Humanities.

Literary and Linguistic Computing
. 23(3). 263-79. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqn021. Online at

http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/fqn021?ijkey=3UzJDubDB0FRQcR&keytype=ref
Bradley, J.
 (2012). Beyond Digital Media: Moving beyond a 'media' orientation in the annotation
of digital objects. In press at the 
Digital Humanities Quarterly
. A draft (under a different name) of
this article is available at 
http://pliny.cch.kcl.ac.uk/docs/article-2011.pdf
Bradley, J., and M. Pasin
 (2012). Annotation and Ontology in most Humanities research:
accommodating a more informal interpretation context. 
DH2012 NeDiMaH Ontology Workshop
. held  17 July, 2012.
Brockman, W. S., L. Neumann, C. L. Palmer, T. J. Tidline. Council on Library and Information Resources.
 (2001). 
Scholarly Work in
the Humanities and the Evolving Information Environment.
 Washington, D. C.: Digital Library Federation, Council on Library and Information Resources. (Online version at 
http://www.diglib.org/pubs/dlf095/
Englebart, D.
 (1962). Augmenting Human Intellect: A conceptual framework. Stanford CA:
Stanford Research Institute. Online at 
http://www.bootstrap.org/augdocs/friedewald030402/augmentinghumanintellect/AHI62.pdf
 (accessed March 2007)
Heath, T., and C. Bizer
 (2011). 
Linked Data: Evolving the Web into a Global Data Space.
 1st
edn. 
Synthesis Lectures on the Semantic Web: Theory and Technology
. 1(1). 1-136. Morgan & Claypool.
Jackson
 (2010). 
RDF-encoding Pliny annotations in the Open Annotation Collaboration project
.
University of Illinois: GSLIS Technical Report #ISRN UIUCLIS--2010/2+OAC.
OAC
 (2011). 
Open Annotation Collaboration
. Website at 
http://www.openannotation.org/
OBOFoundary
 (2012). 
The Open Biological and Biomedical Ontologies
. Website at

http://obofoundry.org/
.
Palmer, C. L., L. C. Teffeau, and C. M. Pirmann. OCLC Research.
 (2009). 
Scholarly Information Practices in
the Online Environment: Themes from the Literature and Implications for Library Service
Development
. Available online at:

http://www.oclc.org/research/publications/library/2009/2009-02.pdf
 (.pdf: 412K/59 pp.).
Pasin, M., and J. Bradley
 (2012). 
Factoid-based Prosopography and Computer Ontologies:
towards an integrated approach
. Draft paper submitted for possible publication. Available online at

http://www.michelepasin.org/papers/43/
SWAN
 (2008). 
SWAN Project: Semantic Web Applications in Neuromedicine
. Website at

http://swan.mindinformatics.org/
.

