



The  digital  age  has  introduced  new  possibilities  but  also  new  problems  for  higher education.  Academics  within  the  same  departments  have  always  shared  teaching materials but a cultural change is taking place in universities, with academics using the internet to share their research (Open Access) and teaching and learning resources (OER: Open  Educational  Resources)  more  widely.  This  spirit  of  collaborative  working  is increasing, and potentially opens up higher education to a wider and global market, giving students and teachers greater access and flexibility. Education for all has taken on a new meaning in the digital age and the true rationale of Openness is one of reclaiming original academic practice and collaboration; consequently the move towards openness extends beyond resources and also increasingly includes Open Educational Practices, or just Open Education. How do new initiatives such as OERu, Open Text Books, and iBooks Author contribute  to  this?  To  change  academic  culture  and  to  encourage  open  educational practices requires much more than technological changes. It will require an understanding of the challenges facing the educational community today and how OERs can help them achieve their goals in teaching and learning. This is particularly pertinent in the Digital Humanities  where  there  is  great  emphasis  on  the  teaching  of  the  collaborative  and communication skills that are requirements for our researchers and research projects as well as important job skills for our students that do not stay in the academy.



This paper draws as case studies on the experiences and publishes the results of two completed and one currently in­progress JISC funded projects for the creation, use, and importantly re­use of OERs. Firstly,
 VirtualDutch 
(
www.dutch.ac.uk
) where a lesser taught language (despite being the one most closely related to English) subject community have collaborated in joint teaching projects. A wide range of Open Educational Resources has been developed since the start of the programme, including self­access reading skills courses, learner’s grammars, online reference works and some 30 multimedia study packs for autonomous learning. These resources cater for various levels of linguistic competence, ranging from topics such as individual Dutch or Flemish authors, like Multatuli or Louis Couperus, to the sociolinguistic situation of Brussels and the multicultural society in the Netherlands  today.  These  are  also  being  used  in  a  series  of  distance­learning programmes.

 

The	second	is	
 Digital	Humanities	Open	Educational	Resources
	(DHOER: 
www.ucl.ac.uk/dhoer
) which was set up to create and release a comprehensive range of introductory materials on approaches, topics, and methods in the digital humanities; these are based on modules currently taught as part of the Master’s programme at the UCL Centre  for  Digital  Humanities.  Importantly,  these  resources  go  beyond  the  digital humanities sphere and support many cognate disciplines, including the whole spectrum of the arts and humanities, cultural heritage, information studies, library studies, computer science  and  engineering. Indeed by pushing the disciplinary boundaries DHOER has contributed  considerably  to  the  advancement of the OER idea and helped to start a movement to bring about the cultural change that the UKOER programme envisages.



The third project, OER CPD4HE/Sustexts (
OER Continued Professional Development for Higher Education, Sustainable Texts and Disciplinary Conversations
), a collaboration with HEDERA.org (HE Development, Evaluation and Research), recognises that subject discipline is a key part of academic identity and that narratives are important in both learning  and  professional  development.  It  has  set out to increase the reach of open practice and engage with institutional policy makers.



Each of these projects has been involved in the awareness­raising of OER, by presenting at	workshops,	conferences	and	organizing	several	UKOER	programme­	and institution­wide  events.  The  focus  for  each  is  on  building  communities  of  users  and contributors to ensure sustainability and to develop standards of best practice. We can gather download statistics simply enough, just as we can for journal articles and other academic resources, but that is no indication of whether or not they have actually been used or indeed re­used as a teaching resource. How this might be achieved is one of the challenges  addressed  here.  This  paper  develops  themes  introduced  in  a  recent publication: ‘Open access and online teaching materials for digital humanities’, Warwick et al eds. (2012)
 Digital Humanities in Practice
, charting the progress and results of new initiatives since that chapter was authored.



Digital humanities should be taking a lead in the development of open access online teaching materials. In our community we take openness and collaboration for granted and commitment to these principles should be central to the development of any of our teaching programmes. By making our teaching resources openly and freely accessable to all we make  our  ideas  and  methodologies  available  to  the  wider  academic  and  research communities. It is in this way, by creating synergies rather than silos and making our educational practice, particularly our critical and methodological approaches to teaching and learning, available to others, that we will overcome the sometimes sceptical reaction to the value of the work that we do (see Bradley 2010, which is taken from a paper he gave at DH2009).  Experience has shown that digital humanities teaching must be relevant to students’ studies and research interests and we must be clear that what we offer are not ‘skills training’ courses (although they too play a part) but new methodologies and new ways to think about our material. Institutional barriers need to be overcome. Colleagues across the arts and humanities and other faculties need to be able to see how students benefit from the digital humanities approach, and then they will better understand our work and support the training of future digital humanities students and researchers (see Mahony and Pierazzo, 2013).

     








Bradley J.
 (2010). No job for Techies: Technical Contribution to Research in the Digital Humanities. In Deegan and McCarty (eds.) 
Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities,
 Ashgate 
http://www.ashgate.com/isbn/9781409410683
Centre for Excellence in Teaching and Learning (CETL) Open Educational Resources

(2010) Universities’ Collaboration in eLearning (UCEL), http://www.ucel.ac.uk/oer10. DHOER: Digital Humanities Open Educational Resources 
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dhoer
Hirsch (ed.)
 Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics, Open Book
Publishers.
http://www.openbookpublishers.com/product/161/digital­humanities­pedagogy­­practices
­­principles­and­politics
JISC Phase 1 
 (2010). Open Educational Resources Programme Phase one: JISC,

https://cms.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/elearning/oer.aspx
JISC Phase 2
. (2011). Open Educational Resources Programme Phase 2

http://www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/elearning/oer2.aspx
JISC Phase 3
. (2012). Academy/JISC Open Educational Resources Programme Phase 3

http://www.jisc.ac.uk/oer
Mahony, Tiedau, and Simons
 (2012). Open access and online teaching materials for digital humanities. In Warwick et al., (eds). 
Digital Humanities in Practice
. Facet.
Mahony, and Pierazzo
 (2013). Teaching Skills or Teaching Methodology?, in Hirsch (ed). 
Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics
, Open Book Publishers.
SustextsOER
, Sustainable Texts & Disciplinary Conversations,

http://www.ucl.ac.uk/calt/cpd4he/
Warwick, Terras, and Nyhan (eds).
 (2012). 
Digital Humanities in Practice
. Facet.

http://www.facetpublishing.co.uk/title.php?id=7661
VirtualDutch Open Educational Resource
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/alternative­languages/OER/

