
    
    
This poster presents a work-in-progress investigating the use of social media in
scholarly communication and the role such technologies play in the formation of scholarly
communities. The digital humanities have emerged as a focal point for debates about the
impact of information technology in the humanities.
1
 While the digital humanities has its
    roots in the computational processing of text,
2
 the landscape today is far richer and more
complicated than early practitioners of humanities computing could have ever imagined
(except perhaps Father Busa whose grand visions have yet to be realized).
3
 Today, the
digital humanities encompasses transformative methods of inquiry, radically new kinds
of research objects, and potentially destabilizing shifts in scholarly publishing. However,
beyond a metamorphosis of method, object, and account, digital humanities leverage
information communications technology in unique ways to constitute themselves as a

community in-formation.

    
Social media, especially blogs, have been eagerly adopted by the digital
humanities community.
4
 Blogs are pregnant with promise and peril as platforms for
serious (and silly) scholarly communication. They are quick for publishing, support
multimedia, and enable rapid interaction, yet, the low barrier of entry and lack of peer
review puts blog's credibility and quality in doubt. Outside of the digital humanities,
blogs are not necessarily seen as modes of serious scholarly communication, instead they
are considered a place for gossip.
5
 Such totalizing perspective ignores the diverse uses
    and meanings of blogs for scholars in a variety of disciplines.
6
 The value of scholar's blogs
and the vibrant communities of discourse around them should not be understated or
ignored.


The seriousness of blogs as a mode of scholarly communication is evident in the creation of initiatives such as Digital Humanities Now
7
 and the Journal of Digital Humanities.
8
 These projects treat blogs as legitimate forms of proto-scholarship and
provide a filter function to the community; finding high quality discourse within their
curated selection of digital humanities blogs, the Compendium of digital humanities. As a
model for scholarly publishing, the Journal of Digital Humanities presents a reversal of
the traditional dynamics of scholarly discourse. Technology has flipped the flow of
scholarly communication from one of scarcity to surfeit. It is impossible to keep up with
the flood of blogs and Tweet, yet, scholars ignore this "cool kids table" at their peril.
9
 In
the face of such information overload, scholarly communities must change not only their
means of knowledge production, but their information seeking behavior and the ways in
which membership and identity are constituted as well.

    
This study presents a data driven analysis of scholarly discourse focusing on the
sociotechnical dynamics of blogs and their role constituting the digital humanities as a
community-in-formation. There have been a few data driven approaches to
understanding the digital humanities, Melissa Terras' beautiful infographic, Quantifying
the Digital Humanities, was an important first step towards surveying the community
writ-large.
10
 Matthew Jockers and Elijah Meeks have both done some initial work
combining topic modeling and digital humanities blogs. Jockers analyzed one year's
worth of Day of DH blog posts
11
 and Meeks produced a model and visualizations of a
    variety of texts discussing the question "What are the digital humanities?"
12
 This study
continues these initial works with a broader breadth of data and deeper analysis of the
results.

    
This poster presents initial findings and an innovative mixed methodological
    approach combining topic modeling,
13
 a form of computational text mining, with grounded theory,
14
 a method for developing analytical concepts from interpretivist  social science. This mixture of methods enables both a "distant reading" of a vast textual
corpus while also rigorously reading individual texts to better analyze and articulate the
content of scholarly discourse. Leveraging the Compendium of Digital Humanities,
15
 a
curated list of blogs produced by Digital Humanities Now, I archive, mine, visualize, and
interpret these communications paying special attention to the discursive work of
community constitution.

    
The contribution of this poster is twofold. First, it presents a 
data driven

landscape of scholarly communication. Using tools and techniques from information
visualization, I represent a topic model of discourse on digital humanities blogs using a
javascript visualization framework, Data Driven Documents.
16
 Second, it presents a
rigorous methodological procedure for the analyzing topic models rooted in an
interpretivist qualitative analysis framework, grounded theory. Leveraging grounded
theory this study informs our understanding of scholarly communities in-formation with
an interpretive, grounded, empirical analysis of a computational model and its
concomitant texts.










Gold, Matthew K., ed. 
(2012). Debates in the Digital Humanities
. Univ Of Minnesota Press.
Hockey, S. "The History of Humanities Computing." 
A Companion to Digital Humanities
.
2004.
Busa, R. "Foreword: Perspectives on the Digital Humanities." In 
A Companion to Digital
Humanities
. 2004.
Cohen, Dan. "Professors, Start Your Blogs." 2006.

http://www.dancohen.org/2006/08/21/professors-start-your-blogs/
Saper, C. "Blogademia." 
Reconstruction
 6, no. 4 (2006). 
http://www.citeulike.org/group/1736/article/1108357
.
Hank, C. F. "Scholars and their Blogs: Characteristics, Preferences, and Perceptions
Impacting Digital Preservation". University of North Carolina, 2011.

http://ils.unc.edu/~wildem/ASIST2011/Hank-diss.pdf
.
http://digitalhumanitiesnow.org
http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/
Pannapacker, William. "Pannapacker at MLA: Digital Humanities Triumphant?"
2011.

http://chronicle.com/blogs/brainstorm/pannapacker-at-mla-digital-humanities-triumphant/30915
Terras, Melissa. "Infographic: Quantifying Digital Humanities." 2012.

http://melissaterras.blogspot.com/2012/01/infographic-quanitifying-digital.html
Jockers, Matthew. "Who's Your DH Blog Mate: Match-Making the Day of DH Bloggers with
Topic Modeling" 2010.

http://www.matthewjockers.net/2010/03/19/whos-your-dh-blog-mate-match-making-the-day-of-dh-bloggers-with-topic-modeling/
Meeks, Elijah. "Comprehending the Digital Humanities." 2011.

https://dhs.stanford.edu/comprehending-the-digital-humanities/
Blei, D. M., A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. "Latent Dirichlet Allocation." 
The Journal of Machine
Learning Research
 3 (2003): 993–1022.
Glaser, Barney G., and Anselm Strauss. 
The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for
Qualitative Research
. Aldine Transaction, 1967.
Charmaz, Kathy. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through Qualitative
Analysis. 1st ed. Sage Publications Ltd, 2006.
http://tinyurl.com/kaj2vpl
http://d3js.org/



