



Introduction


Today, organizations face the crucial challenge of creating and managing knowledge in order to
succeed. As part of the 
Knowledge Management
 process, 
Knowledge Socialization
 is a critical step
during which the community experiences a decisive interchange of ideas. In this work, we present 
a
new model for 
Knowledge Management
 based on the classic Nonaka and Takeuchi's one but
adapted to the Web 2.0 by using wiki technologies to support 
Knowledge Socialization
, and we
propose 
to apply this model to the case of 
elBulli
.



elBulli
, voted by industry authority 
Restaurant
 magazine as the best restaurant in the world in 2002
and from 2006 to 2009 (William, 2012), has now become a foundation for creativity and innovation
in high cuisine. It incorporates disciplines such as technology, science, philosophy, and the arts in
its research. Aware of the value of knowledge, the organization publishes its results in international
conferences, books or journal articles, in a similar way to the academic process of peer review.
Therefore, 
elBulli
 is an appropriate case to apply a 
Knowledge Management
 model that makes
maximum use of its knowledge.






Knowledge as an asset


In recent years, the technological development and globalization have produced significant
structural changes in society and the economy. New emergent industries embody a new economic
reality: knowledge has become the main economic resource (Drucker, 1969). Indeed, nowadays,
knowledge is the asset that generates more value in an organization, and the competitiveness of
companies depends heavily on how they maintain and access their knowledge (Fensel, 2004;
Davies, 2003).



Ikujiro Nonaka and Hirotaka Takeuchi propose a model whereby the creation of knowledge is a
continuous and iterative process that transforms 
tacit
 knowledge (individual and subjective) into

explicit
 (objective and shared) and vice versa (Nonaka, 1995). This process goes through four
phases:



Socialization
 is the action of sharing tacit knowledge with other individuals by means of
observation, imitation and practice during collective work (for example, celebrating a
meeting).
Externalization
 is the action of making tacit knowledge explicit (for example, writing an
article) in order to share it.
Combination
 is the process of synthesizing more complex explicit knowledge from various
sources of simpler explicit knowledge (for example, building a prototype).
Internalization
 is the assimilation of explicit knowledge. It occurs when we understand
explicit knowledge through experience (for example, nobody can tell you how to ride a bike,
you need to practise to learn).




Knowledge at 
elBulli
elBulli
 is especially fascinating because of the processes from 
elBulli Restaurant
 to 
elBulli Foundation
 and the way the organization has redefined itself in the last few years: evolution and
reinvention, diffusion of their practices, concepts and techniques across time and social space, etc.
(William, 2012)



Illustration 1: 
Nonaka & Takeuchi’s cycle (Aranda-Corral et al., 2010)


By applying Nonaka and Takeuchi’s principles, we can demonstrate that 
this organization creates
valuable knowledge:



Socialization.
 Creativity and innovation implies constant learning so that its employees
attend specialized courses, gastronomic fairs, research stays, conferences, etc.
Externalization.
 Unlike the traditional model, in which a chef would closely guard his
secrets, 
elBulli
 documents exhaustively all its achievements and developments since 1990
(catalogues, audiovisual resources, recipes…) and it publishes its research in conferences,
books or journal articles.
Combination.
 The process of creation can be seen as an engineering process (Soler, 2007):

1. Initial idea
2. Use of one of the creative methods known
3. Tests
4. Analysis and reflection (wisdom and previous knowledge)
5. Finish and last tests
6. Prototype
7. Customer’s feedback
8. Last changes
9. Finished and catalogued dish

The combination of existing creative methods, techniques, previous knowledge and known
recipes results in new creative methods and new dishes.
Internalization.
 Cooking is a suitable example of knowledge internalization: only by
practising these new methods and recipes, chefs can learn how to prepare new dishes.
Adrià suggests externalizing all their knowledge onto the 
Bullipedia
, an online database that 
“will
contain every piece of gastronomic knowledge ever gathered”
. Adrià and some of the best chefs all
over the world are putting in common their wisdom to agree on the content of the 
Bullipedia
. Their
aim is to create an encyclopedia with 15,000 articles “
where users will leave suggestions for dishes,
concepts and combinations of flavours”
 that will affect, in Adrià’s opinion, other chefs’ creativity.



This agreement can only be achieved through a sound process of socialization. According to
Nonaka & Takeuchi’s cycle, socialization entails a transformation from individual tacit knowledge
into collective tacit knowledge. This conversion is extremely hard to carry out due to tacit
knowledge being highly personal, deeply attached to individual actions in a specific context (a
profession, a technology…) and composed of individual’s technical skills that can only be acquired
by learning and improved by experience . Hence, it is difficult to formalize and share.







Proposal

Our contribution is 
a new model for 
Knowledge Management
 in which we replace the
disadvantaged classic 
Knowledge Socialization
 phase, based on few experts and unidirectional
master-apprentice relationships, with a new process characterized by:


 Multidirectional socialization given in social networks, where users adopt multiple roles
(they are now content 
prosumers
, that is, the production and consumption of knowledge is
entrusted to the users (Aranda-Corral et al., 2010)).
 Interchange of ideas through wiki technologies.


This model fits in better with the current technological and social reality.



Thus, we showcase the advantages that our model would provide in a case such as that of Adrià and
his colleagues when building the 
Bullipedia
 from scratch, so that they really benefit from the
interaction with a large community of prosumers and use wiki technologies to exchange ideas and
develop a more nuanced metalanguage that really supports this initative and make it sustainable in
the long term. This approach could also be exploited in other cases of collaboration such as
collective software construction, project documentation or interactive learning.



Illustration 2: 
Social network based on prosumers


Theoretical framework: the power of crowds, social networks and collaborative technologies

Socializing knowledge is critical to both its evolution and its usefulness (Inmon, 2008). 
Knowledge
Management
 cycle might provide better outcomes, in terms of quality and value of knowledge, by
improving the socialization process. In the case of 
elBulli
, Adrià and his colleagues are agreeing on
the content of the upcoming 
Bullipedia
. However, they discovered that the hardest part was to find a
common language, that is, the worlds of science and gastronomy may share similar processes and
methodologies, but they rarely intersect.



It is at this point in which we believe things can be enhanced: turning to a big community instead of
a few experts. We borrow some James Surowiecki’s concepts on crowdsourcing (Adams, 2011;
Schall, 2012; Sautter, 2011; Doan, 2011; Brabham, 2008). Surowiecki asserts that a large group of
people is smarter than an elite few, no matter how brilliant (Surowiecki, 2004). Four conditions
must be met for a crowd’s collective intelligence to produce more accurate outcomes than a small
group of experts (Tapscott, 2006):


1) Diversity of opinion
2) Independence of members from one another
3) Decentralization
4) A good method for aggregating opinions



We can demonstrate Surowiecki’s ideas are applicable to our model. First of all, the case of 
elBulli

is both especially interdisciplinary and heterogeneous enough. Adrià uses 
“cuisine as a discourse in
order to create a dialogue with other disciplines”
. The foundation is a mash-up of science, the arts,
philosophy and technology as a 
creativity-generating
 universe that produces knowledge (William,
2012). It is this crossroad among various disciplines what creates such heterogeneity and diversity
of knowledge and opinions about the same topic (1).



Secondly, advance in technology have provided novel ways to socialize knowledge. Social
networks have created a new reality of social interaction (Easly, 2010; Mika, 2007) that has enabled
more effective ways of agreement (Mazzega, 2011). Users organized around a wiki constitute a
non-hierarchical and decentralized social network whose members are independent but collaborate
(Leuf, 2001) (2 y 3). According to 
Complex Systems
 theory, members in social networks selforganize
and agreement emerges from the bottom-up as a result of their interactions (Wood, 2010;
Jones-Rooy, 2010).



Finally, a wiki fosters the idea of 
prosumers
 collaborating on the Web as it blurs the line between
the reader and the writer (Caverly, 2008). Many online communities have adopted this approach to
create collective knowledge (John, 2004; Krötzsch, 2006; Ebersbach, 2006). 
Wikipedia
, the great
online encyclopedia, supports this proposition. Therefore, Wikis are a good method for aggregating
knowldge and opinions (4).






Conclusions

We have shown that 
elBulli
 creates valuable knowledge by applying Nonaka and Takeuchi’s
principles. The organization is now creating the Bullipedia, an online database that 
“will contain
every piece of gastronomic knowledge ever gathered”
. Nonaka & Takeuchi's cycle can be adapted
to manage that knowledge in social networks based on prosumers. In our model, we propose:


Turning to the crowd instead of letting the Bullipedia be constructed by a small group of
experts.
Use of wiki technologies, as they have demonstrated their effectiveness for collaboration.


                








Adams, P. 
 (2011). 
Grouped: How Small Groups of Friends Are the Key to Influence on the Social
Web
. Berkeley, CA, USA: New Riders.
Aranda-Corral, G., J. Borrego-Díaz, and A. Jiménez-Mavillard
 (2010). Social Ontology
Documentation for Knowledge Externalization. 
Metadata and Semantic Research: Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference, MTSR 2010
. Sánchez-Alonso, S. and Athanasiadis, I. N. (eds).
Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag. CCIS 108, 137–148.
Brabham, D. C.
 (2008). Crowdsourcing as a Model for Problem Solving An Introduction and
Cases. 
Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies
 14.1,
75–90.
Caverly, D. C., and A. Ward
 (2008). Techtalk: Wikis and Collaborative Knowledge Construction.

Journal of Developmental Education
 32.2, 36-37.
Davies, J., D. Fensel, and F. Harmelen
 (eds.) (2003). 
Towards the Semantic Web: Ontology-
Driven Knowledge Management
. John Wiley & Sons.
Doan, A., R. Ramakrishnan, and A. Y. Halevy
 (2011). 
Crowdsourcing systems on the World-Wide Web
. ACM 54.4, 86-96.
Drucker, P.
 (1969). 
The Age of Discontinuity: Guidelines to our Changing Society
. New York:
Harper & Row.
Easly, D., and J. Kleinberg.
 (2010). 
Networks, Crowds, and Markets
. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ebersbach, A., et al.
 (2006). 
Wiki: Web Collaboration
. Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer
Science+Business Media.
Fensel, D.
 (2004). 
Ontologies: Silver Bullet for Knowledge Management and Electronic Commerce
.
2nd ed. Heidelberg: Springer.
Inmon, W.,  B. O’Neil, and L. Fryman
 (2008) 
Business Metadata: Capturing Enterprise
Knowledge
. Morgan Kaufmann.
John, M. and R. Melster.
 (2004). Knowledge Networks – Managing Collaborative Knowledge
Spaces. 
Proceedings of the LSO 2004
. Melnik, G. and Holz, H. (eds). Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany:
Springer-Verlag. LNCS 3096, 165–171.
Jones-Rooy, A. and S.E. Page.
 (2010). The Complexities of Global Systems History. 
Journal of
The Historical Society
 10, 345–365.
Krötzsch, M., D. Vrandecic, and M. Völkel. 
(2006). Semantic MediaWiki. 
Proceedings of the 5th
ISWC 2006
. Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag. LNCS 4273, 935–942.
Leuf, B., and W. Cunningham. 
(2001). 
The Wiki Way: Quick Collaboration on the Web
. Boston,
USA: Addison-Wesley.
Mazzega, P., et al.
 (2011). A Complex-System Approach: Legal Knowledge, Ontology, Information
and Networks. 
Approaches to Legal Ontologies
. Sartor, G., et al. (eds), Springer Science+Business
Media: Law, Governance and Technology Series 1, 117-132.
Mika, P.
 (2007). 
Social Networks and the Semantic Web
. Barcelona, Spain: Springer.
Nonaka, I., and T. Takeuchi
 (1995). 
The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese
Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation
. Oxford University Press.
Sautter, G., and K. Böhm.
 (2011). High-Throughput Crowdsourcing Mechanisms for Complex
Tasks. 
Social Informatics
. Datta, Anwitaman, et al. (eds). Springer: LNCS 6984, 240-254
Schall, D., and F. Skopik
 (2012). Social network mining of requester communities in
crowdsourcing markets. 
Social Network Analysis and Mining
 2.4, 329-344.
Soler, J., F. Adrià, and F. Adrià
 (2007). 
Un día en 
elBulli
. 
elBulli
 Books.
Surowiecki, J.
 (2004). 
The Wisdom of Crowds
. New York: Random House.
Tapscott, D., and A. Williams
 (2006). 
Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything
.
New York: Penguin Group.
William, G.
 (2012). Staying creative. 
Wired UK Edition
, 102-111.
Wood, A. T.
 (2010). Fire, Water, Earth, and Sky: Global Systems History and the Human Prospect.

Journal of The Historical Society
 10, 287–318.

