
    
    
MATRIX has developed an open source application that cultural and educational
institutions can use to preserve digital materials and display them online. The
application, KORA (
http://kora.matrix.msu.edu
), 
is particularly well-suited for working with digital objects of all media types and for easily creating displays of
these objects in multiple ways that enhance their educational and research value.
MATRIX, a humanities computing research center at Michigan State University,
has built and enhanced this application in the course of seven years of research
with support from the National Science Foundation.

    
Designed for long-term preservation and access, KORA includes unique features
that meet two important needs of institutions that have limited technological
resources: (1) simple design of the digital repository and the ingesting of data,
and (2) the ability to display digital materials online in diverse ways, such as
image galleries, multimedia educational activities, or story chapters.

    
The KORA architecture is unique in that it can accommodate any set of metadata
schemes (or tables) in individualized digital libraries. Users can easily create
metadata elements (database fields) using a simple point-and-click interface,
select the type of form control for each element (e.g., required formats for date,
URL, file upload, etc.), and then determine whether the element is required for
each record, whether it should appear in search returns, and other features.
KORA then automatically generates storage structures, ingestion (data entry)
forms, and validation requirements for each metadata scheme.

    
Because the back-end of projects can be created in minutes by people without
technical training, the overhead for getting projects started is reduced
immeasurably compared to beginning with a blank SQL or other database. And
because KORA is an online application, multiple users can develop a collection
from separate locations at the same time. Also, KORA can ingest materials from
any standardized repository and can output XML that can be harvested by these
repositories.

    
KORA also includes an easy-to-use "associator" tool for creating relationships
that combine objects of various media types. As demonstrated by diverse
websites built with KORA, many creative displays are possible using this open
source application.

    
In keeping with the need to ensure authenticity and integrity of files ingested into
KORA, as described in the International Research on Permanent Authentic
Records in Electronic Systems (InterPARES) guidelines, automatic fixity
checking has been built into KORA to verify that data has been kept free of
tampering and corruption. Long-term access to digital material can be assured by
storing this preservation information in the digital repository, as described by the
ISO Reference Model for an Open Archival Information System (OAIS) model
and Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies (PREMIS).







New Release: KORA 3.0
KORA 3.0 will be released this fall with a host of new features, including many
        major changes:
        
        
all new user experience design;
independence from MYSQL so it can be used with other database
                management systems;
enhanced Multilanguage capabilities;
rebuilt on Symphony, KORA will have enhanced plugin capabilities;
and many more features.

    



