



Introduction

This paper presents an ongoing experiment in mapping temporalities of multispecies
ecologies. Addressing the conference theme, "Freedom to Explore", the paper asks: what
happens to figurations of "freedom" and "exploration" when recontextualized as multispecies
emergences (more-than-human freedoms), indeterminate patternings (temporal rather than
spatial formations), and contingent, historically constituted mobilities (uneven trajectories
and explorations constituted through difference and incommensurability)? Rather than
proposing answers, my presentation offers two ways of thinking through such
recontextualization. It unpacks a speculative methodology for digital and diagrammatic
representations of time, and offers an early look at a working prototype for a fungal clock: a
web-based visualization of polyrhythmic interactions between multiple organisms.






Diagrammatic Representation, Or Mapping Worlds Otherwise


Political ecologists describe maps as power tools: they both reveal 
and
 hide. As Arturo
Escobar writes: "Who counts, draws, and narrates and how is of decisive importance."
(Escobar 2008; Rocheleau 2005). Indeed, fast growing fields of data visualization,
geographic information systems, simulation modeling, and scenario planning tap into silos of
data to generate seemingly inexhaustible means to chart, count, tabulate, track, tag, and thus
masterfully deploy a financialized Fix. Such representations are tethered to nineteenth
century projects of calculation and seriality (Daston 1994; Hopwood, Schaffer, Secord 2010),
epistemic tools constructed through historical materialities and discursive formations, but
fraught nonetheless with violent legacies of occupation, extraction, and obsolescence. Given
their rhetorical clout in the production and disruption of globalized hegemonies, how might
visualizations — and specifically new diagrammatic forms and alternative cartographies —
render worlds otherwise?



To describe freedom and exploration is to consider circulation. To study circulation is to
unpack relationships that unfold not just in space, but through time. How might
diagrammatic forms open up little-known, or perhaps long-forgotten, multiplicities of time or
polyrhythms?



Unilinear orderings of time undergird scientific visualizations of growth, transformation, and
exchange. Representations of species origins and variabilities — through historical timelines,
energy cycles, network patterns, activity diagrams, genealogies, arborescent or rhizomatic
animations — largely depend on a chronological sequence of standardized, homogeneous
units of time. Entangled histories, indeterminate contingencies, and dynamic mobilities are
distilled into teleological causes and effects. Qualitative differences and durational
synchronies/sedimentations (Bergson 1922) that emerge from and constitute change,
movement, and encounter are quantified into time series, or a measurable succession of
seconds, minutes, hours, days, months, years, decades, centuries. Modernity configures and
depends upon a temporality abstracted from lived experiences and meterized into a
compressed, scalable, and human-centric coordinate of space (Harvey 1990). Against
unilinear anthropogenic time, difference is obscured and becomes difficult to locate. As
capitalist breakdowns come to a head, the need for critical attention to differential
temporalities can no longer be ignored.






Multispecies Times: A Fungal Clock


The second thread of this paper offers a speculative methodology for diagrammatic
representation. It presents an experimental web project that reframes unilinear time as
entangled polytemporalities constituted through more-than-human assemblages. An
interdisciplinary collaboration between anthropologist Anna Tsing and media artist Elaine
Gan, it takes the form of a fungal clock. Written in html-5, and built through the lens of field
research and multispecies ethnographies of matsutake (mycorrhizal fungi) worlds, the clock
brings together a series of digital experiments in representing time. Instead of visualizing
cycles and encounters between determinate species beings against a single (Western
European) time scale, the clock diagrams interweaving temporal relations or topologies of
differential rhythms. These relations are distinguished as three main folds: synchrony or
coordination across recurring seasons; emergent becomings or interspecies webs that
sediment into ecologies and worlds; uneven trajectories and aleatory encounters that
crystallize into historical conjunctures.



Diversity does not unfold against a standard ruler of time. Nor does "it" branch through
anthropogenic scales. Learning from Karen Barad, "temporality is produced through the
iterative enfolding of phenomena marking the sedimenting historiality of differential patterns
of mattering." (Barad 2007) What is at stake in visualizing temporality is not 
how
 formations
change, but 
which
 properties, taxonomies, and relations become meaningful, intense, and
valuable within and across particular regimes, niches or semiotic systems. What comes to
matter is a matter of time.



Thus, this paper considers critical diagrams of temporalities as expanded ways of defining
"freedom" and "exploration". It calls for ongoing development of conceptual-practical
apparatuses that rethink human-centric movements and agencies as multispecies webs and
temporal patternings. It highlights these questions as generative lines of inquiry for an
exciting field of possibilities, increasingly known as "digital humanities": (1) What kinds of
temporal relations materialize into and emerge through biocultural assemblages? (2) How
might interdisciplinary scholarship (theorizing, making, imagining) articulate these
movements to work through incommensurable claims for engineering life or death? (3) What
digital diagrammatic media might mobilize ethico-political practices beyond modernist
master narratives and postmodernist relativisms — and towards worlds constituted through
immanence and difference?



                








Barad, K.
 (2007). 
Meeting the Universe Halfway
, Durham and London: Duke University
Press. 180.
Bergson, H.
 (1922). 
Duration and Simultaneity
, translation by Leon Jacobson in Durie, R. (ed.) 
Duration and Simultaneity: Bergson and the Einsteinian Universe
, Manchester:
Clinamen Press, Ltd., 1999.
Braidotti, R.
 (2002). 
Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist Theory of Becoming
,
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Daston, L.
 (1994). Enlightenment Calculations, 
Critical Inquiry
 21(1:)  182-202. Autumn 1994.
De Landa, M.
 (2000). Deleuze, Diagrams, and the Genesis of Form, 
American Studies
, 45(1): 33-41.
Deleuze, G., and F. Guattari
 (1987). 
A Thousand Plateaus
. translation by Brian
Massumi, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Escobar, A.
 (2008). 
Territories of Difference
, Durham and London: Duke University Press. 56.
Galison, P.
 (2003). 
Einstein's Clocks, Poincaré's Maps: Empires of Time
, New York and
London: W.W. Norton & Company.
Harvey, D.
 (1990). 
The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry Into the Origins of
Cultural Change
, Cambridge, MA and Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing.
Hopwood, N., S. Schaffer, and J. Secord
 (2010). "Seriality and Scientific Objects in
the Nineteenth Century", 
History of Science
 48, 161. 251-285.
Lima, M.
 (2011). 
Visual Complexity: Mapping Patterns of Information
. New York:
Princeton Architectural Press.
Rocheleau, D.
 (2005). Maps as Power Tools: Locating Communities in Space or Situating
People and Ecologies in Place? in Brosius, P., A. Tsing, and C. Zerner (eds.), 
Communities and
Conservation
, Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. 326-362.
Rosenberg, D., and A. Grafton
 (2010). 
Cartographies of Time
. New York: Princeton Architectural Press.

