

    Katherine Walter
    kwalter1@unl.edu
    Co-director, Center for Digital Research in the Humanities, University of Nebrask–Lincoln

Kenneth Price
kprice2@unl.edu
Co-director, Center for Digital Research in the Humanities, University of Nebrask–Lincoln



Welcome to the University of Nebraska–Lincoln and to Digital Humanities 2013. The theme we have chosen for this year’s conference is 
“Freedom to Explore.”
 This theme seems appropriate given our Great Plains location and our belief that Digital Humanities is a new frontier in the Humanities.  



In the 1840s, many pioneers traveled across Nebraska in wagon trains and hand-carts along the Great Platte River Road and wagon trails, such as the Oregon Trail–moving west to seek riches, land or religious freedom.  Some people stayed, especially in response to the 1862 Homestead Act signed by President Abraham Lincoln. At that time many Civil War veterans, women and blacks homesteaded, as well as immigrants from such countries as Germany, Bohemia, Sweden and Denmark. Forty miles south of Lincoln, Nebraska today is the Homestead National Monument of America—worth seeing if you have time. Another place worth visiting is Scout’s Rest, Buffalo Bill’s ranch outside of North Platte.



Also in 1862, the last piece of Trans-Continental Railroad legislation was signed by President Lincoln.  From Council Bluffs (just across the river from Omaha, Nebraska) entrepreneurs hastened to build the railroad west to Promontory Point in Utah. Today, the Union Pacific Railroad headquarters is in Omaha and Warren Buffett, the owner of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) railroad, lives in Omaha, so railroading is very much part of Nebraska’s heritage. Those of you who will be going on the Nebraska History tour will see the Durham Western Heritage Museum in Omaha, located in a former Union Pacific station. If you are driving further east, we recommend visiting the Union Pacific Railroad Museum in Council Bluffs, Iowa. 



For many years, Mexicans and Latinos from Central America have been migrating to Nebraska; and now Lincoln, Nebraska, is a refugee resettlement community with about 53 languages-of-origin spoken—languages of Southeast Asia, former Soviet bloc countries, the Middle East and Africa, as well as Spanish.   Indian tribes in Nebraska today are the Omaha, Ponca, Dakota Sioux and the Winnebago, with other tribes having been relocated to reservations in Oklahoma or South Dakota during the nineteenth-century.   



The University of Nebraska–Lincoln (UNL) was formed by the third major piece of legislation signed by President Lincoln in 1862—the Morrill Act. UNL is both a land-grant university and a university designated a “research university—very high activity” by the Carnegie Foundation.  It has over 24,000 students from 130 countries. In 2010, we joined the Committee on Institutional Cooperation (CIC), a consortium of universities enrolling approximately half a million students each year, with approximately $7 billion in funded research, over 79 million library volumes, and 46,000 faculty. The CIC Digital Humanities Committee is now exploring how our institutions can collaborate on digital humanities research and teaching.  



In 2005, the University approved the formation of the Center for Digital Research in the Humanities, and the commitment from this institution has been wonderful. We hope you can come to our open house during the conference and meet some of our faculty and graduate students. 


Sixty plus years after Father Roberto Busa began working with IBM on the Index Thomisticus, digital humanities continues to explore and create new approaches for examining the humanities.  Like our conference logo—the Western Meadowlark taking wing–DH is soaring!





                






