
                
                Harnessing the Wisdom of the Crowd: The Citizen Archivist Program at the National Archives
                
                
                
                
In articulating his commitment to transparency, collaboration, and participation in his administration, President Obama said to his senior staff, on his first day in office:

                
                
"Our commitment to openness means more than simply informing the American people about how decisions are made. It means recognizing that Government does not have all the answers, and that public officials need to draw on what citizens know. And that's why, as of today, I'm directing members of my administration to find new ways of tapping the knowledge and experience of ordinary Americans—scientist and civic leaders, educators and entrepreneurs…"

                
                
One member of that administration, David S. Ferriero, Archivist of the United States, describes how his agency had embraced the President's message and engaged the American public in the work of the National Archives.

                
               
                
            

            

                
                Biography
                
                
The Honorable David S. Ferriero was sworn in as 10th Archivist of the United States on November 13, 2009.

                
                
The Archivist of the United States, appointed by the President of the United States, 
                    is the head of the National Archives and Records Administration, an agency of the 
                    Executive Branch of the Government. The agency is responsible for providing guidance 
                    to the White House and the Executive Branch agencies and departments on the 
                    creation and maintenance of their records. It oversees the transfer to the National 
                    Archives of the permanently valuable records of the federal government and makes 
                    them available for study. Those records include the Oaths of Allegiance signed by 
                    George Washington and his troops at Valley Forge, the Declaration of Independence, 
                    the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights.

                
                
This collection translates into about 12 billion sheets of paper, 40 million photographs, 
                    miles and miles of video and film, and more than 5.3 billion electronic records. The 
                    records are housed in facilities around the country, from Anchorage, Alaska to Atlanta, 
                    Georgia — including 2 Washington, DC, area buildings, 14 Regional Archives, 17 Federal 
                    Records Centers, 13 Presidential Libraries, and the National Personnel Records 
                    Center.

                
                
Previously, Mr. Ferriero served as the Andrew W. Mellon Director of the New York Public 
                    Libraries (NYPL). In this position he was part of the leadership team responsible for 
                    integrating the 4 research libraries and 87 branch libraries into one seamless service 
                    for users; and was in charge of collection strategy; conservation; digital experience 
                    and strategy; reference and research services; and education, programming, and 
                    exhibitions.

                
                
Before joining the NYPL in 2004, Mr. Ferriero served in top positions at two of the 
                    nation's major academic libraries, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 
                    Cambridge, MA, and Duke University in Durham, NC.

                
                
Mr. Ferriero earned bachelor's and master's degrees in English literature from 
                    Northeastern University in Boston and a master's degree from the Simmons College of 
                    Library and Information Science, also in Boston. He served as a hospital corpsman in 
                    the Navy during the Vietnam War.

                
                
            

            
        
    