
        Is there anybody out there? Building a global DH community
        
        
Digital Humanities has come a long way towards establishing itself as a dynamic and innovative field of study. It has been pointed out however that an important area for further development is a broader internationalization of the Digital Humanities community.   Currently most of the available literature is centered on DH projects in a handful of mainly English speaking countries. An important challenge for the DH community is to extend its international reach and integrate work from a wider range of languages and academic institutions. Presently there are numerous initiatives under way that aim to broaden Digital Humanities regional and linguistic diversity. In this talk I will discuss some of the issues with identifying DH scholars and establishing networks of collaboration drawing on specific examples of setting up the Red de Humanidades Digitales (RedHD). 


    


    

    
    Biography
    
        
Isabel Galina is currently a researcher at the Instituto de Investigaciones Bibliográficas at the National University of Mexico (UNAM). With a background in English Literature and Electronic Publishing, her Ph.D. research at University College London (UCL) was on the impact of electronic resources on scholarly communication and publishing. This led to a particular interest in new modes of scholarship and digital projects within the Humanities.

        
        
At the UNAM she has been involved in numerous initiatives related to institutional repositories, digitization projects, electronic publishing and the use and visibility of digital resources. She is a founding member and current president of the Red de Humanidades Digitales (RedHD) which aims to promote and strengthen Digital Humanities with special emphasis on research and teaching in Spanish as well as the Latin American region in general. She is Associate Editor of 
LLC: The Journal of Digital Scholarship in the Humanities
 and Honorary Research Fellow at the UCL Department of Information Studies.

    










